Copyright 1991 by the Americai
in Psychological Association, Inc
0033-2909/91/$3.«

Psychological Bulletin
1991, Vol. 110, No. 2,305-314

Conventional Wisdom on Measurement:
A Structural Equation Perspective
Kenneth Bollen

Richard Lennox

Sociology Department
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

Institute for Research in Social Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

The applicability of 5 conventional guidelines for construct measurement is critically examined:
(a) Construct indicators should be internally consistent for valid measures, (b) there are optimal
magnitudes of correlations between items, (c) the validity of measures depends on the adequacy
with which a specified domain is sampled, (d) within-construct correlations must be greater than
between-construct correlations, and (e) linear composites of indicators can replace latent variables.
A structural equation perspective is used, showing that without an explicit measurement model
relating indicators to latent variables and measurement errors, none of these conventional beliefs
hold without qualifications. Moreover, a "causal" indicator model is presented that sometimes
better corresponds to the relation of indicators to a construct than does the classical test theory
"effect" indicator model.

Factor analysis (Spearman, 1904) and classical test theory
(Lord & Novick, 1968; Spearman, 1910) have influenced per-

This article explores the applicability of five conventional
guidelines for construct measurement: (a) Construct indicators

spectives on measurement not only in psychology but in most
of the social sciences. These traditions have given rise to criteria

should be internally consistent for valid measures, (b) there are
optimal magnitudes of correlations between items, (c) the valid-

to select "good" measures and to a number of beliefs about the
way valid and reliable indicators' should behave. For instance,
Nunnally (1978, p. 102) warned that if correlations among mea-

ity of measures depends on the adequacy with which one sam-

sures are near zero, they measure different things. Some have
argued that high correlations are better than low ones (e.g,

ples a specified domain, (d) within-construct correlations must
be greater than between-construct correlations, and (e) linear
composites of indicators can replace latent variables. Using
structural equation models, we show that none of these conven-

Horst, 1966, p. 147), whereas others have claimed that moderate correlations are best (Cattell, 1965, p. 88). As the preceding

tional beliefs hold without qualifications.
As a framework for our discussion, we begin by differentiat-

example illustrates, the guidelines to indicator selection are
sometimes contradictory. The result is that one can justify
keeping or discarding an indicator depending on whose advice

ing between indicators that influence, and those influenced by,
latent variables. Building on this distinction, the following sections address the five guidelines and their applicability to the

is followed. Obviously, this is an undesirable state of affairs that

two types of indicators. A conclusion follows where we advocate a structural equation approach to analyzing measures.

suggests that the conventional beliefs on measurement and indicator selection require clarification.
We contend that these contradictions can largely be traced to

Indicators as "Causes" and "Effects" of Latent Variables

two sources. One is that some items do not conform to the
classical test theory or factor analysis models that treat indica-

Classical test theory and factor analysis in psychology view
items or indicators as dependent on a latent variable:2

tors as effects of a construct. We present an alternative model in
which indicators influence a construct. Second is the failure to

y, = A,1i, + ft,

present a measurement model that explicitly shows the assumed relation between constructs, measures, and errors of
measurement.

(D

where y, is the ith indicator,»), is the latent or true variable that
affects it, t, is the measurement error for the ;th indicator, and
Xn is the coefficient giving the expected effect of t|, on yt3 We
assume that >;• and 17, are deviation scores around their means, e,

We are grateful to Jane Scott-Lennox for her suggestions on several
versions of the manuscript and for her help in creating Figures 1 and 2.
We also thank Lewis Goldberg, Rick Hoyle, Jeff Tanaka, and Raymond Wolfe for their many helpful suggestions on drafts of this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Kenneth Bollen, Sociology Department, CB# 3210, Hamilton Hall, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, or to
Richard Lennox, who is now at the Pacific Institute for Research and
Evaluation, 121 West Rosemary Street, 2nd Floor, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina 27516.

1
We use indicator, item, observed measure, or observed variable
interchangeably.
2
This section and the next one rely heavily on previously published
work (Bollen, 1984).
3
To simplify the notation we do not use an additional subscript to
index the individuals in a sample. The i subscript that we use indexes
the indicators, so if we had, say, four indicators we would have four
equations like Equation 1, one for each indicator.

305

306

KENNETH BOLLEN AND RICHARD LENNOX

is uncorrelated with 17,, COV(«,,«,) = 0 for i + j, and £(E, ) = 0.
We could elaborate this model by allowing multiple latent variables to influence ,v;, but to simplify the discussion we maintain
the typical assumption of one underlying factor (i.e., 1),).
Indicators that depend on the latent variable, such as the
preceding, are effect indicators. Figure 1 a is a path diagram that
represents four effect indicators influenced by %. The lower
arrows in Figure la indicate the effects of measurement errors
on the observed variables. We use this example to illustrate our
points throughout the article. The latent variable might be verbal intelligence and the indicators four measures of it. Or, %
could be self-esteem and the >> s, self-esteem measures. What is
critical for the effect indicator model and what is implied in the
assumptions of classical test theory or factor analysis is that the
latent variable determines its indicators.
Another possible measurement model has indicators that
cause the latent variable:

where jj, and all xs are deviation scores, COV(xt,, f,) = 0 for all i,
and £(f,) = 0. Equation 2 differs from Equation 1 in that the
indicators determine the latent variable rather than the reverse.
We can consider Equations 1 and 2 to be regression equations.
In Equation 1, the explanatory variable is latent and the dependent variables (the y s) are observed. In Equation 2, the explanatory variables (the xs) are observed and the dependent variable
is latent.
Blalock (1964, pp. 162-169) referred to the indicators in
Equation 2 as "cause indicators" but other names include formative or composite indicators. We use the term causal indica-

tors borrowing from Blalock but do not attribute any special
significance to the term cause other than the fact that the indicators determine the latent variable. Note also that this differs
from a principal-components model in that a disturbance term
is present, and that Equation 2 has just one latent variable for q
indicators rather than q latent variables.
In contrast to the effect indicators model in Figure la, Figure
Ib depicts four xt indicators that influence the latent variable,
17,. If for example, 1)1 represents socioeconomic status (SES),
the xs might be education, occupational prestige, income, and
neighborhood. Notice that these indicators determine a person's SES rather than the reverse. For instance, according to this
model, if income increases, SES increases even if education,
job, and neighborhood stay the same. On the other hand, we do
not expect an increase in SES to require a simultaneous increase in all four indicators (Hauser, 1973). Thus, modeling
these four indicators as dependent on the latent variable (see
Equation 1) would not make substantive sense. Other examples
of causal indicators include exposure to discrimination, which
is indicated by race, sex, age, and disabilities. Similarly, life
stress could be the latent variable and job loss, divorce, recent
bodily injury, and death in family could be four causal indicators of it. A construct of objective social interaction might be
measured with time spent with spouse, with co-workers, with
friends, and with others. Accuracy of eye-witness identification
could be measured by recall of characteristics of the accused
such as eye color, hair color, height, weight, manner of dress, or
the presence of a beard. All of these are causal rather than effect
indicators (see Bollen, 1984) because in each case the indicators
determine the latent construct.

(a)

Figure 1.

Path diagrams of effect (a) and causal (b) indicator measurement models.

CONVENTIONAL WISDOM ON MEASUREMENT

This distinction between indicators as causes and indicators
as effects of latent variables has fundamental implications for
the conventional ideas about indicators.

Internal Consistency
Perhaps the most widely accepted premise in classical measurement theory is that indicators positively associated with the
same concept should be positively correlated with one another.4
This internal consistency perspective is dominant in psychology, sociology, and the other social sciences. It forms the basis of
many reliability estimates and of factor analysis. This belief of
the need for positive correlations among indicators of the same
concept explains the common practice of screening correlation
matrices for items that cluster together and discarding items
that have near zero or negative correlations with other measures
of the same construct.
We can ascertain the appropriateness of internal consistency
by examining the effect and causal indicators represented in
Figure la and Ib. We begin with effect indicators. To simplify
our presentation we standardize ij| and the ys. Consider the
correlation of y, with y^\
CORR(ylt y,)

(3)

With the observed and latent variables standardized, X,, and Xj,
give the correlation of yl with i), and y2 with %, respectively.
Given that each indicator has a positive association with % (i.e.,
\ i > ^ 2 i > 0), the correlation between y, and y2 should be positive as required by the internal consistency criterion. Of course,
the same results follow for any other pair of the y variables:
They should be positively correlated. Thus, these results support the internal consistency perspective.
In Figure Ib and Equation 2, a different story emerges. Consider 17, and the xs standardized as before. The correlation of x^
with % is
CORR(x,,jc2)

(4)

As Equation 4 shows, one cannot know the correlation between
x1 and Xi, nor that between any pair of the xs that is based on
the causal indicator model. This means that causal indicators
of the same concept can have positive, negative, or no correlation. Researchers relying on factor analysis or the examination
of correlation matrices for selecting indicators may be overlooking valid measures of a construct if the indicators determine the latent variable. Consequently, always using internal
consistency as a criterion can have dire consequences.

307

else transferability and validity suffer" (p. 88). Finally, still
others find that moderate correlations are optimal:
The optimal level of homogeneity occurs when the mean interitem correlation is in the .2 to .4 range. Lower than. 1 and it is likely
that a single total score could not adequately represent the complexity of the items; higher than .5 and the items on a scale tend to
be overly redundant and the construct measured too specific. The
.2 to .4 range of Intel-correlations would seem to offer an acceptable balance between bandwidth on the one hand and fidelity on
the other. (Briggs & Cheek, 1986, p. 114)

Clearly, the practioner is faced with conflicting advice on the
appropriate level of correlations of indicators of the same latent
variable. Again, we turn to Figure 1 to gain insight into this
problem. For effect indicators (see Figure la and Equation 1),
Equation 3 shows that for standardized variables the correlation between any y, and ys (i + j) is X n X,i, where Xa is the
correlation of y, and 77, and '\n is the correlation of yt and ij,.
The CORR(y,, y^ depends on the magnitude of corelations of
v; and yt with the latent variable they measure. Does a high
correlation indicate a problem? If the indicators are effect indicators that obey Figure la, a high correlation of the indicators
suggests that one or both measures are highly correlated with
ih, a situation that is desirable. A low CORR (yit y j ) does suggest poor reliability (i.e., low squared correlations of the latent
with the observed variables, Lord & Novick, 1968, p. 61) for one
or both measures. Though we would prefer a moderate correlation over a low correlation, we see no reason to choose indicators with moderate correlations over those with high correlations for effect indicators. Thus, for effect indicators of a single
latent variable that conform to Equation 1, we find high correlations superior to moderate or low ones.5
But this is only part of the story. Consider Figure Ib with
causal indicators. For indicators that determine the latent variable, the magnitude of the indicator correlations is not explained by the model, therefore we cannot say much about the
validity of x, as a measure of 17,. We can say that high correlations between the xs make it difficult to separate the distinct
impact of individual xs on ij,. To the extent that one or more of
the xs approaches being a perfect linear combination of the
others xs, this creates a multicollinearity problem. Low correlations lessen this difficulty.
In brief, we recommend high correlations of indicators for
effect indicators. However, we have no recommendations for
the magnitude of correlations for causal indicators, because
these correlations are explained by factors outside of the model.
Sampling Facets of a Construct

Optimal Correlations of Indicators

When selecting indicators of a unidimensional construct,
researchers are sometimes advised to select ones that represent

Another measurement prescription is that researchers
should seek an optima] level of correlation of indicators. One
school of thought proposes that high correlations are desirable.
For example, Selltiz, Wrightsman, and Cook (1976) argued that
"if all variables measure the same general characteristic of an
attitude... then we should be able to show that the variables are
all highly correlated" (p. 402). Cattell (1965), on the other
hand, contended that interitem rs ought not to be too large:
"Homogeneity should not exceed a certain point in a good test,

4
This, of course, assumes that negatively worded items are receded
so that all items reflect the same direction.
5
Remember that this recommendation is conditional on the model
that underlies the data. Had we suspected correlated errors of measurement between indicators, then the correlation of indicators could be
inflated or deflated by this factor. Using covariance algebra, the composition of the correlation between indicators with correlated errors
can be easily derived and the appropriate qualifications placed on the
above statements.

308

KENNETH BOLLEN AND RICHARD LENNOX

all facets of it. Implicit in this argument is the notion that too

In summary, the recommendation that we sample the facets

narrow a set of items undermines construct validity. For example Epstein (1983) suggested that an item should be included in

of a construct can be misleading. With effect indicators of a
unidimensional construct (see Figure la), equally reliable indi-

a scale only if it contributes unique variance to the total scale

cators are essentially interchangeable. If many facets mean

What is often not realized is that the average interhem correlation
for most intelligence tests is between .20 and .30. If items in a scale
were more highly correlated with each other, they would be too
redundant to sample efficiently the breadth of broad personality
variables such as intelligence, honesty, or extraversion. An ideal
item in a test that measures a broad trait is one that has a relatively
high correlation with the sum of all items in the test (minus itself)
and a relatively low average correlation with the other items, (p.
366)
Cattell (1965) had a similar view:
Usually, in a well functioning machine or living organism, we
judge its efficiency by how well it functions as a whole. We do not
expect the parts all to be exactly the same, and indeed, such homogeneity is the mark of a lower organism. Similarly, any complex
and ingenious test may need to be put together like a watch, with
all its parts properly balanced for some final result. If it is chopped
up the scores on its parts need not necessarily correlate highly
with one another, (p. 162)
One way to assess this advice is to evaluate the consequences

many dimensions, then each dimension should be treated separately with its own set of effect indicators. For causal indicators
(see Figure 1 b), excluding an indicator changes the composition
of the latent variable and with few exceptions each causal indicator is important to include.

Within-Construct Correlations Vfersus
Between-Constructs Correlations
When selecting indicators, researchers look for items which
tend to "cluster together." Specifically, some claim that the
correlations of indicators of the same construct should exceed
the correlations between indicators from different constructs.
A more formal examination determines the suitability of this
strategy. Figure 2 is a path diagram of two constructs (?j, and ?j2)
each with three effect indicators. In equation form the model is
'=1,2,3

(5)

i = 4, 5, 6,

(6)

and

of removing indicators. If each of our original indicators are
"representative" of distinct facets of a construct, then we should
face dire consequences by removing any one of them. Starting
with Figure la, suppose that we remove yt. Doing so has no
impact on the correlations of the remaining ys with ij, or their
correlations with each other. That is, Xn is the same correlation
of y, with j)j, and the CORR(j;, yt) remains the same. Although
the composite formed by all indicators may be less reliable if we
use three indicators instead of four, as long as we have sufficient
effect indicators to estimate a model and these are at least moderately correlated with %, the issue of adequately representing

where y,, TJ,, and r/2 are standardized, COV(e;, 17,) = 0 for i items 1 to 6 and j = latent variables 1, 2, COVfc,^) = 0 for i + j,
and E((,) = 0 for all /. Consider first the correlation between
two indicators of the same construct, say y, and y2:
COKR(yt, y2) =

(7)

The correlation between two indicators each from a different
construct (e.g., y, and >>„) is

all facets of a concept is specious.
Our point is that, for all practical purposes, equally reliable
effect indicators of a unidimensional concept are interchange-

(8)

able. However, heterogeneous facets preclude unidimensionality. If Cattell (1965) and Epstein (1983) are talking about multidimensional constructs, then each dimension should be mea-

where p12 is the correlation of TJ, with i72. According to conven-

sured with several indicators. Forcing effect indicators of
distinct dimensions into a unidimensional model such as Fig-

y, and yt are items that measure different constructs. Of course,

tional wisdom, the CORR(y,, y2) should exceed CORR(>,, yt)
whenever yt and y2 are items measuring the same construct and

ure la is not an adequate solution.

if the two latent variables were orthogonal (p12 = 0), this criterion would be satisfied. But typically we would expect two

Causal indicators operate differently (see Figure Ib), for
when we remove one indicator, say x,, the repercussions are

constructs to have a nonzero correlation. Even then, the withinconstruct correlations often exceed the between-constructs

more serious. With causal indicators TJ, is composed from all
indicators (and the disturbance). Omitting an indicator is omit-

correlations, but a comparison of Equations 8 and 7 reveals that
there can be exceptions. Whenever Xj, is less than X42p,2, the

ting a part of the construct. For instance, suppose that t), is
objective social interaction, xt to x, are time with friends, with

between-constructs correlation exceeds the within-construct
correlation. For instance, suppose that the correlation of y2

family, with work colleagues, and with others, respectively. Excluding x, gives an incomplete picture of objective social inter-

with i)! is .5 (= X 21 ), the correlation of jj, with ij2 is .8 (= X42), and

action. Or, if 17, is exposure to discrimination, not measuring
race will lead us to miss a crucial part of exposure. Initially this

within-construct correlation would be less than the between-

may seem to suggest that the idea of "sampling all facets" of a
construct is appropriate for causal indicators. However, we take
issue with the word sampling. With causal indicators we need a
census of indicators, not a sample. That is, all indicators that
form Tit should be included.6

the correlation between the constructs is .8 (= pl2). Here, the

6
If an jc has no association with the other causal indicators, then it
exclusion might have less impact than if it is correlated. Or, if an x is an
exact linear combination of the other jts, it provides redundant information and is therefore less critical.

309

CONVENTIONAL WISDOM ON MEASUREMENT

T

1

T

€1

€. 2

€-3

Figure 2.

C 4

i

r

C s

^ 6

Path diagram of two correlated latent variables with effect indicators.

constructs correlation even though yt and y2 are measures of
the same construct and y, and yt belong to different constructs.
Clearly, the same results hold for other pairs of indicators and
for other values of the correlations.7 Thus, if we rely on inspection of the correlation matrix alone, we may incorrectly identify
which variables gauge the same construct and which measure
different ones.8
It is easy to demonstrate that this guideline has even less basis
with causal indicators of different latent variables. With causal
indicators such as those displayed in Figure Ib, the model
places no restriction on the magnitude of the correlations between indicators. Therefore, we can make no definitive statements about between- versus within-construct correlations.
In summary, the guideline that within-construct indicator
correlations should exceed between-construct correlations can
lead to incorrect indicator selection for effect and causal indicators.

Linear Composites as Substitutes for Latent Variables
Another common practice is to calculate the sum of equally
weighted items to form a composite scale to measure the latent
variable. Often these composites stand in for the latent variable
in a regression, analysis of variance (ANOVA) or similar types
of analysis. The appropriateness of the linear composite, like
other conventions, depends on whether the latent variable is
measured with effect or causal indicators.
Consider Figure la with effect indicators. The equally
weighted linear composite, say c,, is

y, + yi + y, + y,
( X M + X21 + X31 + X41)t!l

€3 + £4),

(9)
where X = X,, + Xj, + X31 + X^ and e = tt + t2 + '3 + '4- (The
second line follows from substitution of Equation 1 for each
indicator and simplifying) The last line of Equation 9 shows
that the equally weighted linear composite has a relation to TJ,
that is similar in form to that of each of the individual indicators: X is the expected change in c, for a one unit change in ?),
and e is the error term in c, . Thus, the linear composite's scale

7
Orthogonal factor analysis would appear to be a possible exception. However, exploratory factor analysis with orthogonal factors
differs from the situation described here in several ways. First, and
most important, the advice on within-construct correlations being
greater than between-constructs correlations is based on the examination of the correlation matrix of indicators, not on a factor analysis of
these measures. Second, exploratory factor analysis virtually always
leads to each indicator having nonzero loadings on more than one
factor. This differs from the assumption in the above guidelines, that
each measure is only influenced by a single construct. If the factor
complexity of the variable is greater than one, within and between constructs loses its meaning.
'Campbell and Fiske's (1959) multitrait-multimethod (MTMM)
approach to measurement validity relied heavily on comparing correlations for measures of traits found by different methods. Here too, the
comparisons of correlations can be misleading. See Althauser and Heberlein (1970) and Werts and Linn (1970) for an alternative structural
equations approach to the MTMM model.

310

KENNETH BOLLEN AND RICHARD LENNOX

differs from 17, (except in the unlikely case that X = 1 ) and the
composite contains measurement error.
One can gain further insight into the nature of the composite
fe) by examining its squared correlation with i;,. Using the
definition of the squared correlation and Equation 9, we see
that
p\m = [COV(e,, 7, 1 )] 2 /[VAR(c 1 )VAR( 1)l )]
= (A 2 VAR(,M))/[A 2 VAR(.h) + VAR(e)].

(10)

The numerator is the variance in the composite associated with
the true score or latent variable. The denominator is the total
variance of the composite. As such, Equation 10 gives the reliability of the linear composite. The linear composite and % are
perfectly correlated (or cts reliability is one) only in the unlikely
case that V\R(e) is zero. As is well-known, the reliability of the
composite typically is greater than that of its components ( Lord
& Novick, 1968), but this is not the same as saying that it has
perfect reliability An implication of these results is that using
the composite as an explanatory variable in a regression analysis still leads to an inconsistent ordinary least squares (OLS)
estimator of the coefficient for the latent variable that the composite reflects. If the composite is the only variable measured
with error, then the coefficient estimated for that variable will
tend to be too low. In the more realistic situations of more than
one explanatory variable containing error, the coefficient estimates can tend to be downwardly or upwardly "biased" (Bollen, 1989, chap. 5).
What if we use a weighted, rather than unweighted, composite? How does this alter the above conclusions? If we knew \ and
weighted each y, by 1 /X we would have
C j ^ D . + d/A)*,

(11)

where c2 = (1 /\)c, . Now c2 and i;, have the "same scale" in the
sense that we expect a one unit shift in c2 for a one unit shift in
% . However, this does not eliminate the random measurement
error in c, or c2, as is clear from the last term in Equation 11.
Other weighting schemes for the ys could increase the squared
correlation between c, (or c2) and ?(, , but except for some unlikely cases, this correlation cannot be raised to one.
With causal indicators the meaning of the linear composite
shifts somewhat. Call the equally weighted linear composite for
the four xs in Figure Ib c3:
C

3 ~ x\ + X2 + X3 + Xi = !'•*>

(12)

where 1' = [1 1 1 1] and x' = [xt x1xixt\. Recall that i;, is

fi. (13)
where I" = [TH T12 7,3 714 ]. Comparing Equation 12 with Equation 13, one can see that o, only equals TI, in the unlikely case
that all the ys are one, and f, is zero. More generally c3 does not
equal ij, .
We just examined the squared correlation of the equally
weighted composite of effect indicators and the latent variable
that they measure. We can do the same for the causal indicators.
Using the definition of the squared correlation, we get
p\m = [COV(c3, r,,)] 2 /[VAR(c 3 )VAR(,,,)].

(14)

Substituting Equations 1 2 and 1 3 into Equation 1 4 and simplifying we get

r + *,,)],

(is)

where £», is the population covariance matrix of the xs and *,,
is the variance off,. As long as r does not equal 1 and *i i ^ 0,
this squared correlation is less than one. Introducing c, as a
proxy for an explanatory latent variable in an OLS regression
analysis leads to an inconsistent estimator of the coefficient
for i),.
The similarities between linear composites of effect indicators or causal indicators are intriguing. In both cases the linear
composite has less than perfect correlation with the latent variable i;i. In both cases this correlation can be altered by weighting the indicators. Even with optimal weighting, the correlation
of 17, with the composites is reduced from one due to error
variance. But, the source of error variance differs by type of
indicator. For effect indicators, the origin of the error in the
composite is the measurement error in the indicators. For the
causal indicators, error variance is due to the equation disturbance f,, which affects j|,, but which is uncorrelated with the xs.
Regardless of these differences, the linear composite is not
equivalent to the latent variable.

Conventional Wisdom in Practice
Until now we have nearly exclusively dealt with analytic results to demonstrate the flaws in several conventional beliefs
about measurement. In this section we illustrate our analytic
findings with several psychological examples to clarify the implications of our work for applied research. We chose these
examplesbecause they are representative of much of psychological measurement efforts. In some cases we find that the procedures followed by researchers are consistent with the analytic
results. In other cases they are not. But in all cases the measurement model is not formally specified.

Example 1
Watson and Friend's (1969) Fear of Negative Evaluation Scale
(FNE) has 30 items that are listed in Example 1 in the Appendix. Although the authors did not present a formal measurement model in their original article, they did make it clear that
they relied heavily on internal consistency for item selection.
Our earlier analytic results showed that using internal consistency as a standard implies effect indicators, an unidimensional construct, and uncorrelated measurement errors. The
items seem to reflect the latent variable. For instance, we expect
that as a person's fear of negative evaluation increases, so will
his or her agreement with the item "I am afraid that people will
find fault with me." Thus, effect indicators rather than causal
indicators seem reasonable. The unidimensionality of the construct measured by the indicators seems plausible. All items
address the fear of being evaluated by others and use the words
"worry" and "afraid" frequently Though we could conceive of
arguments suggesting more than one dimension underlying
these items, to simplify matters we accept the unidimensionality of the construct. Finally, although correlated errors are possible among items using similar wordings or appearing near to
each other on the questionnaire, for purposes of discussion we
assume that errors are generally independent of one another.
How internally consistent should the items be? The homogeneity of the items translates directly into extremely high inter-

311

CONVENTIONAL WISDOM ON MEASUREMENT

nal consistency with coefficient alphas routinely ranging between .92 and .96 (Watson & Friend, 1969; Wolfe, Lennox,
Welch, & Cutler, 1984). In Wolfe et al.'s analysis, the scale also
produced an average interitem correlation of .39, which according to Briggs and Cheek's (1986) prescription for optimal correlations, is only marginally in the zone of tolerance and therefore
risks narrowing the construct given that by their definitions
they may correlate too highly. In contrast our analytic results
showed that for effect indicators of unidimensional constructs,
the higher the correlations are, the better. So we see no problems with moderately large correlations among these items.
The large number of items in the FNE scale has led some to
suggest that the scale be shortened (Leary, 1983: Wolfe et al,
1984). Some might think that removing indicators destroys the
breadth of the construct being measured and can introduce
inaccuracies. But, reference to our section on removing indicators reveals that no effect indicator is indispensable in measuring a unidimensional construct. And removal may have only
minor effects on the overall reliability of the scale when there
are many highly correlated items. The coefficient alpha for
Leary's 12-item FNE and Wolfe et al.'s 14-item version were
both .90.

Example 2
Berscheid, Snyder, and Omoto (1989) recently devised a scale
to assess the impact of diversity of activities in relationships.
They did so by counting the number of different specific activities that partners in a relationship performed on a regular basis.
Their measure, a 38-item checklist, contains a broad range of
activities such as "attended class," "went to a movie," and "went
to a party." The items are listed in Example 2 in the Appendix.
The authors do not define a measurement model that specifically states the hypothesized relations between the latent variable and items. But, it makes most sense to view these items as
causal indicators of interaction diversity rather than effect indicators of this construct. We expect the diversity to increase as
more of these activities are engaged in rather than the reverse.
For instance, if a couple "engaged in sexual relations" and
"went to a grocery store," these increase the diversity of the
activities. But, we do not expect that an increase in diversity
causes sexual relations and trips to the grocery store.
If we accept that these are causal indicators, our earlier discussion establishes that the items in the diversity of activities in
relationships scale need not be internally consistent or have a
high reliability coefficient. As the following quote indicates,
Berscheid et al. (1989) seem at least partially aware that internal consistency might not be necessary:
Because of the heterogeneity of the behavioral domains sampled,
high internal consistency would not necessarily be expected. We
did, however, compute... a measure of internal consistency for
this 38-item scale of dichotomous responses and found that the
scale is internally consistent. (Berscheid et al, 1989, p. 795)

Perhaps under the pressure of current conventions Berscheid et
al. (1989) report internal consistency. Reliability of causal indicators is not demonstrated by internal consistency (Bollen,
1989, chap. 6). Thus, the justification for reporting such measures is unclear.

Example 3
In the previous two examples the utility of item correlations
in evaluating reliability and validity are relatively straightforward. In the FNE Scale, item correlations are expected to be
high, and indicative of good reliability and low measurement
error. On the other hand, the relationship diversity measures
are best conceived of as causal indicators and therefore need
not correlate. Indeed the correlations of the items offer no information on reliability These expections follow from a measurement model that has a single latent variable with all items being
its effects, as in the FNE, or all items representing its causes, as
in the relationship diversity case. When we have a construct
that has a mix of effect and causal indicators, the situation is
further complicated. The Center for Epidemiological Studies
Depression Scale (CES-D; Radloff, 1977) is a case in point.
The CES-D is a 20-item self-report measure constructed by
collecting "good" items from several previously validated depression scales including the Beck Depression Inventory (Beck,
Ward, Mendelson, Mock, & Erbaugh, 1961); Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory; the Self-Rating Depression Scale
(Zung, 1965); and other unpublished measures. Example 3 in
the Appendix lists the measures. Items were selected to operationalize major components of depression identified in the literature and include depressed mood, feelings of guilt and worthlessness, feelings of helplessness and hopelessness, psychomotor retardation, loss of appetite, and sleep disturbance. These
descriptors suggest that CES-D items measure a multidimensional and not unidimensional construct of depression. Furthermore, the items appear to be a mixture of effect and causal
indicators. For instance, "I felt depressed" and "I felt sad" appear to be effect indicators of depressed mood. That is, we
expect that a change in the latent depression variable leads to a
change in responses to these items. However, "I felt lonely"
could be a causal indicator of the same construct in that loneliness may cause depression rather than vice versa. Alternatively,
loneliness could be a separate dimension that requires several
indicators to measure it. To further complicate things, one
could argue that some items are reciprocally related to depression. For example, individuals may become depressed because
they think people dislike them, which makes them appear unattractive, thus other people may avoid them and actuary dislike
them (i.e, the low affect may be unattractive and offputting).
Radloff (1977) used Cronbach's alpha and assessed the scale's
reliability by examining the internal consistency of items. Considering the multidimensionality of the construct, the presence
of causal indicators, and the possibility of reciprocally related
indicators, inspecting item correlations, internal consistency,
and reliability estimates are difficult to rationalize. If depression was hypothesized to be a single unidimensional construct
that had several effect indicators with uncorrelated errors, then
our previous analytic results would justify a check of internal
consistency for this subset. But, certainly we cannot expect the
same for the mixture of items that are used in the CES-D scale.

Conclusions
We examined five conventional beliefs about measurement,
none of which held without qualification. We found the following: (a) The claim that valid measures of a unidimensional

312

KENNETH BOLLEN AND RICHARD LENNOX

construct must be internally consistent is true for effect indicators but not for causal indicators; (b) the prescription of optimal levels of correlations for indicators often is misguided; (c)
the idea that indicators must tap all facets of an u n idi mensional
concept makes sense for causal indicators but not for effect
ones; (d) comparing correlations of indicators within and between constructs can be misleading regardless of the indicator
type; and (e) linear composites of indicators are not the same as
the latent variable with which they are associated.
Conventional wisdom on item selection and scale evaluation
is thus shown to be qualified by consideration of the specific
directional relationship between the indicators and the latent
construct. Traditional measures of reliability and the examination of the correlation matrix of indicators are so ingrained that
researchers have failed to realize that these are not appropriate
under all situations. We presented several examples to illustrate
these points.
Some of our results hold the potential for abuse. For instance,
the causal indicators model seems to offer a handy excuse for
low internal consistency, but the model is not without limitations. Because the latent construct is a linear combination of its
causes (and a disturbance), its validity, and indeed its psychological meanings cannot be judged from its item covariances.
Without external criteria, a cause induced latent trait is psychologically uninterpretable. Also, the causal indicator model in
isolation is statistically underidentified. Only when imbedded
in a causal model that includes consequences of the latent construct can the causal indicator model be estimated (Bollen,
1989, chap. 6). For example, we suggested that the diversity of
social interactions measures proposed by Berschied et al.
(1989) are causal indicators. To estimate a model with these
causal indicators would necessitate the inclusion of consequences of the social interactions diversity construct such as
exposure to socially transmited illnesses or ideas. Similarly, depression as measured by the CES-D scale might be linked to
suicidal ideation or alcohol consumption. The point is that
causal indicators are not invalidated by low internal consistency so to assess validity we need to examine other variables
that are effects of the latent construct.
We also should emphasize that our models relating latent and
observed variables are simplified. Many indicators are probably influenced by more than one latent variable, whereas we
kept one latent variable per indicator. In addition, correlated
measurement errors are likely, but our models assume uncorrelated errors. Adding these characteristics would complicate our
demonstrations but the basic message would be the same: The
applicability of the conventional practices of indicator selection
are potentially misleading.
We do not recommend new guidelines based on indicator or
factor correlations. Rather we advocate that researchers specify
a model to relate their indicators to latent variables. In developing a model researchers should not automatically confine themselves to the unidimensional classical test model. Causal indicator models, multidimensional models, and other alternative
specifications are in some cases more suitable. Once specified
and identified, structural equation procedures can test whether
the proposed model is consistent with the data. Structural
equation models alone cannot lead to correct indicator selec-

tion. However, formal model specification relating observed
and latent variables determines which pieces of conventional
wisdom are appropriate.
References
Althauser, R. P, & Heberlein, T. A. (1970). A causal assessment of
validity and the muHitrait-multimethod matrix. In E. Borgatta
(Ed.), Sociological methods (pp. 151-169). San Francisco: JosseyBass.
Beck, A. T, Ward, C. H., Mendelson, M., Mock, J, & Erbaugh, J.
(1961). An inventory for measuring depression. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 4, 561-571.
Berscheid, E., Snyder, M, & Omoto, A. M. (1989). The Relationship
Closeness Inventory: Assessing the closeness of interpersonal relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57,792-807.
Blalock, H. M. (1964). Causal inferences in nonexperimental research.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Bollen, K. A. (1984). Multiple indicators: Internal consistency or no
necessary relationship? Quality and Quantity, 18, 377-385.
Bollen, K. A. (1989). Structural equations with latent variables. New
York: Wiley.
Briggs, S. R, & Cheek, J. M. (1986). The role of factor analysis in the
evaluation of personality scales. Journal of Personality, 54,106-148.
Campbell, D. T., & Fiske, D. W (1959). Convergent and discriminant
validation by the muhitrait-multimethod matrix. Psychological Bulletin, 56, 81-105.
Cattell, R. B. (1965). The scientific analysis of personality. New York:
Penguin Books.
Epstein, S. (1983). Aggregation and beyond: Some basic issues on the
prediction of behavior. Journal of Personality, 51, 360-392.
Hauser, R. M. (1973). Disaggregating a social-psychological model of
educational attainment. In A. S. Goldberger & O. D. Duncan (Eds),
Structural equation models in the social sciences (pp. 255-289). San
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Horst, P. (1966). Psychological measurement and prediction. Belmont,
CA: Wadsworth.
Joreskog, K. G. (1970). A general method for analysis of covariance
structure. Biometrika, 57, 239-251.
Leary, M. (1983) A brief version of the Fear of Negative Evaluation
Scale. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 9, 371-375.
Lord, E M., & Novick, M. R. (1968). Statistical theories of mental test
scores. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Nunnally, J. C. (1978). Psychometric theory (2nd ed.). New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Radloff, L. S. (1977). The CES-D Scale: Aself-report depression scale
for research in the general population. Applied Psychological Measurement, 1, 385-401.
Selltiz, C, Wrightsman, L. S., & Cook, S. W (1976). Research methods
in social relations (3rd ed.). New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Spearman, C. (1904). "General intelligence", objectively determined
and measured. American Journal of Psychology, 15, 663-671.
Spearman, C. (1910). Correlation calculated from faulty data. British
Journal of Psychology, 3, 271-295.
Watson, D, & Friend, R. (1969). Measurement of social-evaluative
anxiety. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 33, 448-457.
Werts, C. E, & Linn, R. L. (1970). Path analysis: Psychological examples. Psychological Bulletin, 74,193-212.
Wolfe, R. N, Lennox, R. D, Welch, L. K., & Cutler, B. L. (1984, April).
A shortened version of the Fear of Negative Evaluation Scale. Paper
presented at the 55th annual meeting of the Eastern Psychological
Association, Baltimore.
Zung, W K. (1965). A self-rating depression scale. Archives of General
Psychiatry. 12, 63-70.

CONVENTIONAL WISDOM ON MEASUREMENT

313

Appendix
Example 1: The Fear of Negative Evaluation Scale (Watson & Friend, 1969)*
1. I rarely worry about seeming foolish to others."
2. I worry about what other people will think of me when I know it
doesn't make any difference.
3. I become tense and jittery if I know someone is sizing me up.
4. I am unconcerned even if I know people are forming an unfavorable impression of me."
5. I feel very upset when I commit some social error.
6. The opinions that important people have of me cause me little
concern.11
7. I am often afraid that I may look ridiculous or make a fool of
myself.
8. I react very little when other people disapprove of me.b
9. I am frequently afraid of other people noticing my shortcomings.
10. The disapproval of others would have little effect on me.b
11. If someone is evaluating me I tend to expect the worst.
12. I rarely worry about what kind of impression I am making on
someone.b
13. I am afraid that others will not approve of me.
14. I am afraid that people will find fault with me.
15. Other people's opinions of me do not bother me.'
16. I am not necessarily upset if I do not please someone.11
17. When I am talking to someone, 1 worry about what they may be
thinking of me.
18. I feel that you can't help making social errors sometimes so why
worry about them.b

19. I am usually worried about the kind of impression I make.
20. I worry a lot about what my superiors think of me.
21. If I know someone is judging me, it has little effect on me."
22. I worry that others will think I am not worthwhile.
23. I worry very little about what others may think of me."
24. Sometimes I think I am too concerned with what other people
think of me.
25. I often worry that I will say or do the wrong thing.
26. I am often indifferent to the opinions other have of me.b
27. I am usually confident that others will have a favorable impression
ofme. b
28. I often worry that people who are important to me won't think
very much of me.
29. I brood about the opinions my friends have about me.
30. I become tense and jittery if I know I am being judged by my
superiors.

' From "Measurement of social-evaluative anxiety" by D. Watson
and R. Friend, 1969, Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 33,
p. 450. Copyright 1969 by the American Psychological Association.
Reprinted by permission.
b
Indicated reversed-scoring.

Example 2: The Relationship Closeness Inventory-Diversity Subscale (Berscheid, Snyder, & Omoto, 1989)*
1. did laundry
2. prepared a meal
3. watched TV
4. went to an auction/antique show
5. attended a non-class lecture or presentation
6. went to a restaurant
7. went to a grocery store
8. went for a walk/drive
9. discussed things of a personal nature
10. went to a museum/art show
11. planned a party/social event
12. attended class
13. went on a trip (e.g., vacation or weekend)
14. cleaned house/apartment
15. went to church/religious function
16. worked on homework
17. engaged in sexual relations
18. discussed things of a non-personal nature
19. went to a clothing store
20. talked on the phone
21. went to a movie
22. ate a meal
23. participated in a sporting activity

24. outdoor recreation (e.g., sailing)
25. went to a play
26. went to a bar
27. visited family
28. visited friends
29. went to a department, book, hardware store, etc.
30. played cards/board game
31. attended a sporting event
32. exercised (e.g., jogging, aerobics)
33. went to an outing (e.g., picnic, beach, zoo, winter carnival)
34. wilderness activities (e.g., hunting, hiking, fishing)
35. went to a concert
36. went dancing
37. went to a party
38. played music/sang

* From "The Relationship Closeness Inventory: Assessing the Closeness of Interpersonal Relationships" by E. Berscheid, M. Snyder, and
A. M. Omoto, 1989, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, p.
806. Copyright 1989 by the American Psychological Association.
Adapted by permission.

314

KENNETH BOLLEN AND RICHARD LENNOX
Example 3: The Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale (Radloff, 1977)"

1. I was bothered by things that usually don't bother me.
2. I did not feel like eating my appetite was poor.
3. I felt that 1 could not shake off the blues even with help from my
family or friends.
4. I felt that I was just as good as other people.
5. I had trouble keeping my mind on what I was doing.
6. I felt depressed.
7. I felt that everything I did was an effort.
8. I felt hopeful about the future.
9. I thought my life had been a failure.
10. I felt fearful.
11. My sleep was restless.
12. I was happy.
13. I talked less than usual.
14. I felt lonely.
15. People were unfriendly.

16. I enjoyed life.
17. I had crying spells.
18. I felt sad.
19. I felt that people dislike me.
20. I could not get going.
• From "The CES-D Scale: A Self-Report Depression Scale for Research in the General Population" by L. S. Radloff, 1977, Applied Psychological Measurement, 1, p. 387, Copyright 1977 Applied Psychological Measurement, Inc., under agreement with West Publishing Company. Reproduced by permission.

Received September 20,1990
Revision received January 11,1991
Accepted January 19,1991 •

1992 APA Convention "Call for Programs"
The "Call for Programs" for the 1992 APA annual convention will be included in the October
issue of the APA Monitor. The 1992 convention will be held in Washington, DC, from August 14
through August 18. Deadline for submission of program and presentation proposals is December 13,1991. Additional copies of the "Call" will be available from the APA Convention
Office in October.

