Psychological Review
2004, Vol. 111, No. 4, 1061–1071

Copyright 2004 by the American Psychological Association
0033-295X/04/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0033-295X.111.4.1061

The Concept of Validity
Denny Borsboom and Gideon J. Mellenbergh

Jaap van Heerden

University of Amsterdam

Maastricht University

This article advances a simple conception of test validity: A test is valid for measuring an attribute if (a)
the attribute exists and (b) variations in the attribute causally produce variation in the measurement
outcomes. This conception is shown to diverge from current validity theory in several respects. In
particular, the emphasis in the proposed conception is on ontology, reference, and causality, whereas
current validity theory focuses on epistemology, meaning, and correlation. It is argued that the proposed
conception is not only simpler but also theoretically superior to the position taken in the existing
literature. Further, it has clear theoretical and practical implications for validation research. Most
important, validation research must not be directed at the relation between the measured attribute and
other attributes but at the processes that convey the effect of the measured attribute on the test scores.

ical relations in a nomological network (Cronbach & Meehl,
1955), and finally, to the question of whether interpretations and
actions based on test scores are justified—not only in the light of
scientific evidence but with respect to social and ethical consequences of test use (Messick, 1989). Thus, validity theory has
gradually come to treat every important test-related issue as relevant to the validity concept and aims to integrate all these issues
under a single header. In doing so, however, the theory fails to
serve either the theoretically oriented psychologist or the practically inclined tester: The theoretically oriented are likely to get lost
in the intricate subtleties of validity theory, whereas the practically
oriented are unlikely to derive a workable conceptual scheme with
practical implications from it. A theory of validity that leaves one
with the feeling that every single concern about psychological
testing is relevant, important, and should be addressed in psychological testing cannot offer a sense of direction to the working
researcher.
The objective of this article is to show that validity theory can
do better. We aim to analyze the considerations that have led to the
present state of affairs, to show that many of these are irrelevant,
and to offer a simple, clear, and workable alternative. It is our
intent to convince the reader that most of the validity literature
either fails to articulate the validity problem clearly or misses the
point entirely. Validity is not complex, faceted, or dependent on
nomological networks and social consequences of testing. It is a
very basic concept and was correctly formulated, for instance, by
Kelley (1927, p. 14) when he stated that a test is valid if it
measures what it purports to measure.
The argument to be presented is exceedingly simple; so simple,
in fact, that it articulates an account of validity that may seem
almost trivial. It is as follows. If something does not exist, then one
cannot measure it. If it exists but does not causally produce
variations in the outcomes of the measurement procedure, then one
is either measuring nothing at all or something different altogether.
Thus, a test is valid for measuring an attribute if and only if (a) the
attribute exists and (b) variations in the attribute causally produce
variations in the outcomes of the measurement procedure. The
general idea is based on the causal theory of measurement (e.g.,

We start this article with a request to the reader. Please take a
slip of paper and write down your definition of the term construct
validity. Now, take the classic article of Cronbach and Meehl
(1955), who invented the concept, and a more recent authoritative
article on validity, for instance that of Messick (1989), and check
whether you recognize your definition in these works. You are
likely to fail. The odds are that you have written down something
like “construct validity is about the question of whether a test
measures what it should measure.” If you have read the articles in
question carefully, you have realized that they do not conceptualize validity like you do. They are not about a property of tests but
about a property of test score interpretations. They are not about
the simple, factual question of whether a test measures an attribute
but about the complex question of whether test score interpretations are consistent with a nomological network involving theoretical and observational terms (Cronbach & Meehl, 1955) or with
an even more complicated system of theoretical rationales, empirical data, and social consequences of testing (Messick, 1989).
This illustrates a remarkable feature of the validity literature of
the past 50 years. The concept that validity theorists are concerned
with seems strangely divorced from the concept that working
researchers have in mind when posing the question of validity.
This is because in the past century, the question of validity has
evolved from the question of whether one measures what one
intends to measure (Cattell, 1946; Kelley, 1927), to the question of
whether the empirical relations between test scores match theoret-

Denny Borsboom and Gideon J. Mellenbergh, Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam; Jaap van Heerden, Department
of Psychology, Maastricht University, Maastricht, the Netherlands.
We thank Ingmar Visser, Conor Dolan, Martijn Meeter, Keith Markus,
and Brenda Jansen for their comments on earlier versions of this article.
Niels Smits has brought some important differences between measurement
and prediction to our attention.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Denny
Borsboom, Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam,
Roetersstraat 15, 1018 WB Amsterdam, the Netherlands. E-mail:
dborsboom@uva.nl
1061

1062

BORSBOOM, MELLENBERGH, AND VAN HEERDEN

Trout, 1999). When considered within a latent variable framework,
the position is akin to the one taken by Bollen (1989). Also, several
theorists in the previous century have hinted at similar conceptions
(e.g., Cattell, 1946; Loevinger, 1957). Finally, it is likely that most
researchers think of construct validity in causal terms, so that one
could consider the proposed conception to be a kind of underground interpretation of construct validity.
Nevertheless, in the consensus on validity that has emerged in
the past 2 decades, it is difficult to find an explicit formulation
resembling the above. In the writings of leading theorists (i.e.,
Cronbach, 1988; Kane, 2001; Messick, 1981, 1989, 1998; Shepard, 1993), one will not find much that sustains it; rather, one is
likely to find this type of idea in a discussion of historical conceptions of validity (Kane, 2001, pp. 319 –323). More important,
even though many working researchers may be inclined to agree
with the proposed conception if pressed for a definition of validity,
its consequences are not followed through in mainstream validation research. These consequences are not trivial. That the crucial
ingredient of validity involves the causal effect of an attribute on
the test scores implies that the locus of evidence for validity lies in
the processes that convey this effect. This means that tables of
correlations between test scores and other measures cannot provide
more than circumstantial evidence for validity. What needs to be
tested is not a theory about the relation between the attribute
measured and other attributes but a theory of response behavior.
Somewhere in the chain of events that occurs between item administration and item response, the measured attribute must play a
causal role in determining what value the measurements outcomes
will take; otherwise, the test cannot be valid for measuring the
attribute. It is important to note that this implies that the problem
of validity cannot be solved by psychometric techniques or models
alone. On the contrary, it must be addressed by substantive theory.
Validity is the one problem in testing that psychology cannot
contract out to methodology.
In the course of developing the conception of validity as put
forward above, we aim to do two things. First, we aim to offer
simple, yet adequate, semantics for the validity concept. This is
done through a juxtaposition of the proposed validity concept with
existing theory in three domains: ontology versus epistemology,
reference versus meaning, and causality versus correlation. Second, we aim to indicate future directions in research that may
demystify, pinpoint, and solve the widespread validity problem in
psychology. Here, the benefits of a trimmed-down validity concept
are illustrated through a discussion of some clear theoretical and
practical implications that may improve both the theory and practice of psychological measurement.

Ontology Versus Epistemology
If the crucial issue in validity concerns the existence of an
attribute that causally influences the outcome of the measurement
procedure, then the central claim is ontological and not epistemological. This is to say that one is claiming something about which
things inhabit reality and how they relate to each other. Thus, the
realm of ontology includes both the existence of phenomena and
their causal influences. These constituents are fleshed out in the
following sections, which address reference and causality in turn.
The truth of ontological claims is distinct from the ability to find
out about reality, which is the central issue in epistemology.

Measurement is the prototypical epistemological activity in science, and it is therefore easy to make the mistake that one is
primarily claiming something on this front. This is because if the
ontological claim holds, then the measurement procedure can be
used to find out about the attributes to which it refers. Put more
simply, if differences in intelligence cause differences in IQ
scores, then the IQ score differences can be used to find out about
the intelligence differences. Thus, in this very special case, the
truth of the ontological claim guarantees the epistemological access. Note that the truth of the ontological claim is logically prior
to the process of measurement itself because it is a necessary
condition for measurement to be possible. Nevertheless, the ontological claim that underlies the measurement procedure is itself
conceptually distinct from the measurement process. One can see
this by considering the following analogy. It may be a necessary
condition for entering a room that the door leading to that room is
not locked. Still, that the door is not locked is conceptually distinct
from walking through it to enter the room.
However, in the case of measurement, it would seem that to talk
about the ontology is to talk about the epistemology, and there
surely is a sense in which this is correct. Now, it is a small step to
conclude that, instead of laying down the ontological claims involved in measurement, which make so abundantly clear the strong
assumptions one is making about psychological attributes (Borsboom, Mellenbergh, & Van Heerden, 2003; Kagan, 1988; Michell,
1999), the discussion could just as well be limited to the epistemological side of the endeavor, which is respectable and familiar,
without addressing the ontological issues. It is another small step
to conclude that the essential question of validity is about particular aspects of this epistemological process called measurement.
The final step, leading to some very dark philosophical dungeons
from which escape is impossible, is to start talking about some
presumed universal characteristics of this epistemological process
(usually derived from a few paradigm cases like length or temperature measurement) that, if present, would allow one to somehow
be rationally justified in concluding that the ontological claims are
true.
This will not work. The family of procedures that scientists—as
opposed to philosophers—regard as instances of measurement is
diverse and incoherent and has few universal characteristics.
Length and temperature, blood pressure and brain size, and pathology and intelligence all could be said to involve measurement,
but the associated measurement practices are based on vastly
different lines of reasoning and use vastly different methodologies.
So, now one gets into trouble. What could it be that successful
measurement procedures have in common? Is it the way the test
looks? Is it representative sampling from a universe of behaviors?
Is it the line of reasoning on which the test is constructed? Is it the
correlation between a test and some external variable called the
criterion? Is it the (presumed) fact that the test figures in a
nomological network of constructs? Is it just that one can do
something useful with regard to some purpose that is presumably
different from measuring the hypothesized attribute? Or, are we on
the wrong track here because what is important is not a characteristic of tests or test scores but of test score interpretations—
which are, again, presumably different from the obvious ones like
IQ scores measure intelligence?
This line of reasoning quickly gets us nowhere. The reason is
that there are no universal characteristics of measurement except

THE CONCEPT OF VALIDITY

the ontological claim involved. The only thing that all measurement procedures have in common is the either implicit or explicit
assumption that there is an attribute out there that, somewhere in
the long and complicated chain of events leading up to the measurement outcome, is playing a causal role in determining what
values the measurements will take. This is not some complicated
and obscure conception but a very simple idea. If one, however,
fails to take it into account, one ends up with an exceedingly
complex construction of superficial epistemological characteristics
that are irrelevant to the validity issue. And because the measurement processes and models are diverse and complicated, one is
likely to buy into the mistaken idea that the concept of validity
must also be complicated. So, now one gets a multiplication of
terms. For the human condition is such that someone will inevitably distinguish between kinds of validity and degrees of validity,
and so, theorists are bound to come up with a hundred or so
validities, which all come in degrees, until someone stands up
because this is clearly ridiculous and claims that “all validation is
one” (Cronbach, 1980, p. 99) so that all kinds of validity can be
integrated and subsumed under one giant umbrella (Messick,
1989). And because one is now thoroughly convinced that validity
concerns characteristics of an epistemological process, rather than
an ontological claim, one will reach the conclusion that all this
time we were really just talking about the one grand epistemological process—scientific research (Cronbach & Meehl, 1955;
Loevinger, 1957; Messick, 1989). However, given that every attempt at drawing a line between scientific and unscientific research
either fails or duplicates the distinction between good and bad
research, the exciting fact discovered here is that validation research is research. In other words, nothing has been discovered at
all. And the reason for this is that there was nothing to be
discovered in the first place.
When claiming that a test is valid, one is taking the ontological
position that the attribute being measured exists and affects the
outcome of the measurement procedure. This is probably one of
the more serious scientific claims one can make, and it is often
difficult to prove or refute. This, however, does not mean that the
validity concept itself is complicated. Every test constructor in
every scientific discipline has the stated line of reasoning in mind
when he or she is constructing, administering, or interpreting a test.
It is the only aspect that measurement procedures have in common.
If one is going to search for homogeneity in the superficial characteristics of these procedures, one is not going to find any, and
one is likely to build ever more complicated systems covering
different aspects of validity. These systems, however, do not cover
different aspects of validity but describe different research procedures for validation. So, asking people what they think about the
test becomes face validity; checking whether we can predict some
interesting things with it becomes predictive validity; investigating
whether the data fit our theory about the attribute becomes construct validity; and so on.
The union of all possible test-related activities of this kind is not
validity but validation. These terms are sometimes used interchangeably in the literature, but they are not the same. This is clear
because validity is a property, whereas validation is an activity. In
particular, validation is the kind of activity researchers undertake
to find out whether a test has the property of validity. Validity is
a concept like truth: It represents an ideal or desirable situation.
Validation is more like theory testing: the muddling around in the

1063

data to find out which way to go. Validity is about ontology;
validation is about epistemology. The two should not be confused.
Now, most of the validity literature has not dealt with the problem
of validity but with the problem of validation. Although there is
nothing wrong with describing, classifying, and evaluating validation strategies, such activities are not likely to elucidate the concept of validity itself. In fact, if one concentrates on the epistemological problems long enough, one will move away from the
validity concept rather than toward it. Consider, for example,
Messick’s (1989) widely cited definition of validity: “Validity is
an integrated evaluative judgment of the degree to which empirical
evidence and theoretical rationales support the adequacy and appropriateness of inferences and actions based on test scores or
other modes of assessment” (p. 13, italics in the original). No view
could be farther apart from the one advanced here. Validity is not
a judgment at all. It is the property being judged.

Reference Versus Meaning
That the position taken here is so at variance with the existing
conception in the literature is largely because in defining validity,
we have reversed the order of reasoning. Instead of focusing on
accepted epistemological processes and trying to fit in existing test
practices, we start with the ontological claim and derive the adequacy of epistemological practices only in virtue of its truth. This
means that the central point in validity is one of reference: The
attribute to which the psychologist refers must exist in reality;
otherwise, the test cannot possibly be valid for measuring that
attribute. This does not imply that the attribute cannot change over
time or that that psychological attributes are unchanging essences
(cf. Kagan, 1988). It does imply that to construe theoretical terms
as referential requires a realist position about the phenomena to
which such terms refer. Thus, measurement is considered to involve realism about the measured attribute. This is because we
cannot see how the sentences Test X measures the attitude toward
nuclear energy and Attitudes do not exist can both be true. If you
agree with us in this, then you are in disagreement with some very
powerful philosophical movements that have shaped validity theory to a large extent.
The strongest of these movements was logical positivism. Philosophers and scientists endorsing this theory saw it as their
mission to exorcise all reference of theoretical terms (like attitude)
because such reference introduces metaphysics, which the logical
positivists thought was bad. They therefore constructed theoretical
terms as nonreferential. This led them to focus on the meaning of
theoretical terms. Meaning and reference are easily confused but
are very different concepts. As a classic example (Frege, 1892/
1952), the morning star and the evening star have different meanings (namely, the last star still to be seen at morning and the first
star to be seen at evening) but refer to the same thing (namely, the
planet Venus). Because the positivists had a slightly phobic attitude toward metaphysics, they wanted to explain the use of theoretical terms like attitude without letting these terms refer to
reality.
This was an interesting endeavor, but it failed (see Suppe, 1977,
for a good overview). However, one of the relics of the approach
has plagued validity theory to this day. This is the nomological
network. A nomological network is a kind of system of laws
relating the theoretical terms to each other and to the observations.

1064

BORSBOOM, MELLENBERGH, AND VAN HEERDEN

For the positivists, this network served to create meaning without
reference for the theoretical terms. The idea is that the meaning of
a theoretical term is solely determined by the place of that term in
the nomological network: The meaning of the term energy is fixed
by the network and by nothing else— certainly not by a reference
to actual energy. Thus, in this view, one can have meaning without
reference and can invoke theoretical terms without automatically
engaging in ontological claims, which always introduce a lot of
metaphysics.
This idea was used by Cronbach and Meehl (1955) to put
forward their idea of construct validity. Construct validity theory
depends crucially on the availability of a nomological network.
This network does double duty. First, it is said to give an implicit
definition of psychological constructs, in the same way that the
positivists attempted to define theoretical terms. Second, it serves
to generate the idea of construct validity itself, which consists in
the agreement between the nomological network and empirical
data. That is, a test can be considered valid for a construct if the
empirical relations between test scores match the theoretical relations between constructs. One can imagine this as two path models, one hovering over the other. One model stands for theoretical
relations and the other for empirical relations. If the models match,
then there is construct validity for test score interpretations in
terms of the nomological network. For instance, suppose the
nomological network says that the construct intelligence is positively related to the construct general knowledge and negatively to
the construct criminal behavior. Further, suppose that one observes a correlation of .5 between an IQ test and a test for general
knowledge and a correlation of ⫺.4 between the IQ test and the
number of months spent in prison. There is thus a match between
empirical and theoretical relations. In construct validity theory, it
is this match that constitutes and defines the validity concept.
Note that neither the idea of implicit definition of constructs nor
the idea of construct validity itself can be formulated in the
absence of a theory that relates the construct to other constructs.
This is nicely illustrated by attempts to quantify construct validity
in terms of the “distance” between theoretical and empirical relations (Westen & Rosenthal, 2003). Just like construct validity
itself, such attempts do not get off the ground without some kind
of nomological network. Also note that to define construct validity, one needs no reference to the existence of theoretical entities,
and their causal impact on the measurement outcomes is not even
a topic of discussion. Read Cronbach and Meehl (1955) to see how
carefully they avoided this issue. As an illustration of the ambiguity of Cronbach and Meehl’s article, one may compare Bechtold
(1959) and Loevinger (1957), who both discussed construct validity but were talking about two completely different interpretations
of the concept— one positivist and the other realist. In principle,
however, within the construct validity perspective, there is no
friction between Test X measures the attitude toward nuclear
energy and Attitudes do not exist. As long as the empirically
observed relations, between Test X and other tests, match the
theoretical relations in the nomological network, all is fine.
There are, however, serious problems with this view. First, it
gets the scientific process backward. One does not start with
drawing a network of relations, subsequently encountering a blank
spot in the middle, and then concluding that this must be an
implicitly defined construct, the character of which can be read off
from the theoretical relations one has drawn. Perhaps this happens

in subatomic physics, in which the existence of hitherto unknown
particles is sometimes derived purely from the fact that there turns
out to be a blank spot in the theory that must be filled by an entity.
But, to suppose that this is regular practice in psychology, or in
science in general, would be absurd. It is important to think about
the way an attribute relates to other attributes because this is a
crucial step in theory formation. And in the process of spelling out
these relations, one develops something that bears at least a superficial resemblance to a nomological network. But, it is farfetched to presume that such a network implicitly defines the
attributes in question. One could just as well say that the nomological network is implicitly defined by the construct, that they
define each other, or that nothing deserving the name definition is
in play at all. It is even more contrived to presume that the validity
of a measurement procedure derives, in any sense, from the relation between the measured attribute and other attributes. Length is
not implicitly defined in terms of its relation with weight, and
much less is the validity of a meter stick. There is no reason to
suppose that the situation would be different with psychological
attributes.
A second problem is that, even if one were to consider this view
seriously, there are few, if any, nomological networks in psychology that are sufficiently detailed to do the job of fixing the
meaning of theoretical terms. To fix this meaning requires a very
restrictive nomological network. The reason is that if one wants to
evade realist metaphysics, one cannot say “intelligence is a real
attribute with causal impact on our measurements” but only that
“intelligence is a theoretical term that is defined in terms of the
relations it has to other constructs in the nomological network.”
Now, it is crucial for the ideas formulated in Cronbach and Meehl
(1955) that the latter type of descriptive, nonreferential account is
possible because otherwise one is forced to invoke a referent for a
theoretical term like intelligence, which brings in the very metaphysics to be avoided through the back door—introducing such
metaphysics changes the rules of the game considerably.
In some highly developed theories, like the ones in physics, one
could at least begin to consider this account because they are
restrictive enough to single out one particular theoretical term,
which is the only one that has all the right relations. In psychology,
such an account does not work because there is a general lack of
detailed theory. We do have loosely specified ideas on how largely
undefined attributes relate to each other under limited sets of
circumstances, but this is not enough. The typical network in
psychology is in terms of higher and lower correlations between
attributes. Such a loose network is unrestrictive and can be satisfied by an indefinite number of attributes besides the intended one.
That this is not just an academic point but a decisive argument
against using a descriptive, nonreferential account can be immediately seen by considering the intelligence example discussed
above. One does not get anywhere by saying that “intelligence is
whatever is positively related to general knowledge and negatively
to criminal behavior” because there are too many theoretical terms
that will satisfy this description and many of them will evidently
not be the same as intelligence. Few, if any, theoretical terms in
psychology can be unambiguously identified in this way. Thus,
this theory will not be able to single out theoretical terms by
merely describing where they stand in a nomological network.
Cronbach and Meehl (1955) did discuss the problem that nomological networks are incomplete and vague in psychology, but they

THE CONCEPT OF VALIDITY

did not mention the most important implication of that problem: It
is fatal to any positivist reading of their account because it shows
that reference, and the accompanying realist metaphysics of measurement, cannot be avoided.
In this context, it has been noted by validity theorists (Kane,
2001; Shepard, 1997) that requiring the existence of a nomological
network is unrealistic in psychology, which is correct. However, if
one removes the nomological network from construct validity
theory, one is left with very little indeed. In fact, dropping the
nomological network leaves one without the heavily needed theory
of meaning, and one is likely to be forced to introduce reference
again, that is, to interpret the theoretical terms as referring to things
out there in the world. We think that this is a plausible move, as
will be evident, but the consequence is that the main idea of
construct validity, as put forward by Cronbach and Meehl (1955),
loses its bite. That is, if one reintroduces reference, then it is
difficult to maintain that what constitutes validity is a match
between empirical relations and theoretical relations. For this
match is now rendered a helpful epistemological criterion, which
may be given a signaling function but not much more. Thus, if
there is a grave discrepancy between the theoretical and empirical
relations, one knows that something is wrong somewhere; but, this
can hardly be considered news. If the theoretical and empirical
relations match, this match does nothing more than corroborate the
theory. The match is no longer constitutive of validity, however,
because the reintroduction of the realist metaphysics forces one to
shift back to reference as the primary defining feature of validity.
The emphasis that is placed on the importance of ruling out
alternative rival hypotheses for corroborating data (Cronbach &
Meehl, 1955; Messick, 1989) partly acknowledges this. Consider,
as an example, the validity of IQ tests as measures of general
intelligence. The theory of general intelligence predicts positive
correlations between different types of IQ tests. The observation
that such positive correlations indeed obtain can thus be taken as
corroborating data for the validity of these tests as measures of
general intelligence. Now, according to validity theorists, it is
important to rule out alternative hypotheses for such data. However, to what hypothesis should such alternative hypotheses be
considered rivals? Obviously, they are rivals to the hypothesis that
general intelligence exists and causes variation in the measurement
outcomes. What, then, is to be seen as the defining feature of
validity if not exactly the truth of that hypothesis? And if this is
correct, then where does this leave the instrumentalist, positivist,
and empiricist? Consider, for example, instrumentalism. This view
does not invoke truth but usefulness as the primary criterion for the
adequacy of scientific theories and measurements. However, we
are surely not seriously considering the idea that we have to rule
out rivals to the hypothesis that intelligence tests are useful. The
Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS; Wechsler, 1955) comes
in a big heavy box, which is very useful to hit people on the head
with, but the hypothesis that the WAIS is valid for inflicting
physical injury is certainly not the kind of hypothesis we are
interested in. Clearly, from the viewpoint of ruling out alternative
hypotheses, the hypothesis that the test is useful is neither intended
nor relevant, except for the very special hypothesis that it can be
used to measure intelligence because variation in intelligence
produces variation in IQ scores.
However, the flip side of this coin should not be overlooked: If
no attribute answers the referential call, the test is not valid for

1065

measuring that attribute, no matter how useful the test may be for
prediction or selection or how well it may fulfill other functions.
As Kagan (1988) said, this “urges care in the use of descriptive
terms” (p. 619) because if such a term is treated as referential but
has no referent, then one is reifying terms that have no other
function than that of providing a descriptive summary of a set of
distinct attributes and processes. For instance, one then comes to
treat a name for a group of test items as if it were the common
cause of the item responses. That, of course, is a mistake. Kagan
(1988) further noted some difficult problems in constructing referential connections for theoretical terms. Most important is the
observation that this connection may not work in the same way or
even refer to the same attribute or process in different contexts,
situations, or persons. In a latent variable context, this problem is
also noted by Borsboom et al. (2003), who discussed the possibility that the latent space underlying a set of item responses may not
have the same dimensionality or structure across persons. This is
a complicated issue, but that does not mean that psychologists may
therefore neglect it. To state that one measures an attribute but that
that attribute does not exist is not to put forward some sophisticated philosophical position but to make an empty gesture to evade
the difficulties involved.
In conclusion, a positivist or instrumentalist reading of construct
validity requires a descriptive theory of meaning that must invoke
nomological networks. Cronbach and Meehl (1955) tried to construct an account of validity on this basis. However, the nomological network interpretation of construct validity is inadequate, as
has been recognized in the literature. Dropping the nomological
network from consideration simply means that one has to go back
to a realist interpretation of psychological attributes. In a realist
interpretation, however, the crucial issue is reference and not
meaning. Therefore, a question like Are IQ tests valid for intelligence? can only be posed under the prior assumption that there
does exist, in reality, an attribute that one designates when using
the term intelligence; the question of validity concerns the question
of whether one has succeeded in constructing a test that is sensitive
to variations in that attribute.

Causality Versus Correlation
Although construct validity theory is, in its original form, inadequate, it does represent a serious attempt to forge a validity
concept that has an account of meaning and a function for theory
and that stresses that there is no essential difference between
validation research and research in general. Moreover, if one
removes the nomological network from consideration, replaces
meaning with reference, and reintroduces the realist perspective,
much of what is said in construct validity theory remains consistent and plausible. Also, the idea of construct validity was introduced to get rid of the atheoretical, empiricist idea of criterion
validity, which is a respectable undertaking because criterion validity was truly one of the most serious mistakes ever made in the
theory of psychological measurement. The idea that validity consists in the correlation between a test and a criterion has obstructed
a great deal of understanding and continues to do so.
The concept continues to exert such a pervasive influence on the
thinking of psychologists because many are under the impression
that construct validity is really criterion validity, with the criterion
replaced by the construct (this fallacy cannot be attributed to

1066

BORSBOOM, MELLENBERGH, AND VAN HEERDEN

construct validity theorists, as is evident from the writings of
Cronbach & Meehl, 1955; Kane, 2001; and Messick, 1981, 1989).
However, the inadequacy of this view does not depend on whether
one views the criterion as a variable to be predicted from test
scores, as an infallible measure of the theoretical construct to be
measured, or as the theoretical construct itself. The crucial mistake
is the view that validity is about correlation. Validity concerns
measurement, and measurement has a clear direction. The direction goes from the world to psychologists’ instruments. It is very
difficult not to construct this relation as causal. Criterion validity
uses correlation and similarity, whereas it should use direction and
causality.
Of course, causality is a laden term, and many researchers seem
afraid to use it. The platitude correlation is not causation is deeply
inscribed in the conscience of every researcher in psychology, and
in the literature, the word causes is often replaced by euphemisms
like determines, affects, or influences; in measurement, we see
traits “manifesting” or “expressing” themselves. What is meant is
that traits cause observed scores. It is perfectly all right to say this
because hypothesizing a causal account does not mean that one
interprets every correlation as a causal relation. This, again, is the
epistemological side of the issue, which remains as problematic as
ever—although progress has been made in this respect, as is
evidenced in the work of writers like Pearl (2000) as well as in the
development of latent variable models. The primary power of
causality lies in the theoretical opportunity to think directionally
rather than in terms of similarity or correlation (see, for some good
examples, Glymour, 2001; Pearl, 2000). Now, measurement is a
causal concept, not a correlational one, and validity is so too. For
clarification, some absurdities to which any theory based on a
correlational account of validity leads are pointed out. The criticisms must be explicitly understood as applying not just to the
criterion validity view but to any view that does not invoke a
causal arrow pointing from the attribute to the measurement
outcomes.
First, it has been observed by Guilford (1946) that the idea of
criterion validity leads to the conclusion that a test is valid for
measuring many things, as epitomized in his famous statement that
a test is valid for anything with which it correlates. However, the
likelihood of encountering zero correlation in real life is exceedingly small, and especially in the social sciences, everything tends
to correlate with everything (Meehl, 1978). Therefore, the upshot
of any line of thinking that sees correlation as a defining feature of
validity is that everything is, to some degree, valid for everything
else. This absurdity does not arise in a causal theory because it is
not the case that everything causes everything else.
Second, the idea has the unfortunate consequence of equating
degrees of validity with the value of the correlation coefficient:
The higher the correlation, the higher the validity. The limiting
case is the case in which two variables correlate perfectly, which
would imply perfect validity. That is, if one views validity as
correlational, one is bound to say that if two constructs have a
perfect correlation, then “they are really the same construct under
two different labels” (Schmidt & Hunter, 1999, p. 190). This is
very problematic. For instance, suppose one is measuring the
presence of thunder. The readings will probably show a perfect
correlation with the presence of lightning. The reason is that both
are the result of an electrical discharge in the clouds. However, the
presence of thunder and the presence of lightning are not the same

thing under a different label. They are strongly related— one can
be used to find out about the other—and there is a good basis for
prediction, but they are not the same thing. When one is validly
measuring the presence of thunder, one is not validly measuring
the presence of lightning for the simple reason that one is not
measuring the presence of lightning at all. The limiting case of the
correlational view implies that perfect correlation is perfect validity, and this leads to the idea that deterministically related attributes are the same thing. This absurdity does not arise in a causal
theory because variations in the presence of lightning do not play
a causal role in producing variations in the presence of thunder.
Third, the correlation is a population-dependent statistic; that is,
it is sensitive to the amount of variability in the attribute to be
measured across populations. A well-known instance is the attenuating effect of restriction of range in the presence of imperfect
relationships between variables. Any correlational view must
therefore hold that validity itself is by necessity variable over
populations. Corrections for unreliability and restriction of range
(Lord & Novick, 1968) are going to solve some of the trouble here
but not all of it. In particular, there is one important, wellestablished case of valid measurement in which the population
dependence of correlations raises serious problems. This is the
case of extensive measurement (Campbell, 1920; Krantz, Luce,
Suppes, & Tversky, 1971). This is very troubling because extensive measurement is more or less the paradigm example of measurement in general (Narens & Luce, 1986). To take a familiar
example of extensive measurement, suppose that one is measuring
the length of rods and that the measurement apparatus used is a
meter stick. Further suppose that one is measuring without error.
The correlation between the measurement outcome and the real
length will be unity in most populations, as it should be, but there
is an important class of populations in which it will be zero. This
is the class of populations of rods of equal length. Therefore, one
must conclude that in such a population, the meter stick is not valid
for measuring length. This is a strange result. In extensive measurement, it is quite meaningful to say that all objects in such a
subpopulation are, say, 4.2 meters long and that this measurement
is valid. In the causal account, this absurdity does not arise. This
is because causality is directional and conditional: The causal
account says that if there are differences in the attribute, then these
will produce differences in the measurement outcome. However, if
there are no differences in the attribute, no differences in the
measurement outcomes are expected. This in no way precludes the
validity of the measurement outcomes themselves, which is exactly as it should be. Do note that the important issue here is not
that the correlation, as a statistic, is in some sense inadequate but
that a conceptualization of validity in terms of covariation, rather
than causality, is flawed.
In conclusion, correlations are epistemologically relevant because they are sometimes indicative of causality, but they are not,
and cannot be, constitutive of validity. Perhaps we have refuted
this view in somewhat greater detail than is strictly necessary, as
criterion validity has been considered inadequate at least since
Cronbach and Meehl’s (1955) introduction of construct validity
(Kane, 2001; Messick, 1989). We considered a thorough refutation
important, however, because it is our impression that many people
who do not subscribe to the criterion validity perspective still
entertain a correlational conception of validity—the only difference is that they have replaced the criterion with the construct

THE CONCEPT OF VALIDITY

itself. However, it is clear that if attribute differences do not play
a causal role in producing differences in measurement outcomes,
then the measurement procedure is invalid for the attribute in
question. Correlations are not enough, no matter what their size.
Height and weight correlate about .80 in the general population,
but this does not mean that the process of letting people stand on
a scale and reading off their weight gives one valid measurements
of their height. To state otherwise is to abuse both the concept of
measurement and of validity. The very fact that a correlational
view of measurement allows for this kind of language abuse must
be considered a fundamental weakness; any theory of validity that
sustains such absurdities should immediately be dropped from
consideration. Therefore, not just criterion validity but any correlational conception of validity is hopeless. The double-headed
arrows of correlation should be replaced by the single-headed
arrows of causation, and these arrows must run from the attribute
to the measurements.

Where to Look for Validity
The proposed theory of validity now stands. Validity is a property of tests: A valid test can convey the effect of variation in the
attribute one intends to measure. This means that the relation
between test scores and attributes is not correlational but causal. A
test is valid for measuring an attribute if variation in the attribute
causes variation in the test scores. In this case, we say that it is true
that the test measures the attribute in question. The concept of
validity thus expresses nothing less but also nothing more than that
an attribute, designated by a theoretical term like intelligence,
exists and that measurement of this attribute can be performed with
a given test because the test scores are causally affected by
variation in the attribute. This conception does the job we want
validity to do, and it does it in a simple and effective way.
The analysis has direct relevance for the practice of test construction and analysis. In particular, it seems that the emphasis on
the role of constructs in theories, and their place in nomological
networks, has prompted validation research to adopt what has been
called a top-down strategy (Cervone, 1997). This basically means
that much validation research is concerned with creating tables of
correlation coefficients and then checking whether these go in the
right direction. Although such macrolevel relations are important,
it would seem that the primary objective of validation research is
not to establish that the correlations go in the right directions but
to offer a theoretical explanation of the processes that lead up to
the measurement outcomes. That is, there should be at least a
hypothesis concerning the causal processes that lie between the
attribute variations and the differences in test scores. As in Embretson’s (1983) terminology, validation should be concerned primarily with construct representation and only secondarily with
nomothetic span.
The upshot of this line of reasoning for test construction is clear.
Purely empirical methods, based on the optimization of external
correlations, are very unlikely to generate tests that can be considered valid measurements. This is because focusing on predictive
properties will destroy, rather than enhance, measurement properties such as validity. The reason for this is simply that items that
measure the same attribute will be correlated. Correlated items,
however, are relatively useless in prediction because they generate
multicollinearity (they do not explain unique variance in the cri-

1067

terion; Lord & Novick, 1968, p. 332; Smits, Mellenbergh, & Vorst,
2002). What one selects when optimizing predictive utility are
items that are mutually uncorrelated but highly correlated with the
criterion. This is not what one expects or desires in measurement.
Note that this does not preclude that tests constructed in this
manner may be highly useful for prediction. It does imply that
optimizing measurement properties and optimizing predictive
properties are not convergent lines of test construction.
What is missing in such empirically oriented methods is a theory
on what happens between the attribute and the test scores. Maximizing correlations will not remedy this problem but aggravate it.
One has to start with an idea of how differences in the attribute will
lead to differences in test scores; otherwise, the project of test
construction is unlikely to generate tests that are valid for more
than prediction. This may be one of the few instances in which
psychology may actually benefit from looking at the natural sciences. In the more exact quarters, nobody starts constructing
measurement instruments without the faintest idea of the processes
that lead to the measurement outcomes. And, it is interesting to
note that the problem of validity appears never to have played the
major and general role it has played in psychology. These two
observations may well be related: The concept of validity may
never have been necessary because the instruments were generally
set up on the basis of an idea of how they would work. In that case,
the question of what it is, precisely, that is measured can simply be
resolved by pointing to the processes that lead to the measurement
outcomes.
In contrast, the question of what psychological instruments
measure is generally not answered by pointing to the way the
instruments work but by pointing to the relation they have with
other instruments. This way of working makes the question What
is measured? a question to be answered after the test has been
constructed. Thus, the contrast here is between a conception that
sees validity as something that one puts into an instrument and a
conception that views validity as something to be discovered
afterward. Psychologists have tended to construe validity as an
empirical matter; that is, the question of what is measured is to be
answered by data. However, a century of experience with test
construction and analysis clearly shows that it is very hard to find
out where the scores are coming from if tests are not constructed
on the basis of a theory of item response processes in the first
place. Therefore, we would like to push our validity conception
one step further and to suggest not only that epistemological issues
are irrelevant to validity but that their importance may well be
overrated in validation research too. A large part of test validity
must be put into the test at the stage of test construction—a stage
of the testing process that has received little attention compared
with the enormous emphasis that has been placed on test analysis.
Thus, it is suggested here that the issue may not be first to measure
and then to find out what it is that is being measured but rather that
the process must run the other way. It does seem that if one knows
exactly what one intends to measure, then one will probably know
how to measure it, and little if any validation research will be
necessary. If this is correct, then the problem of validation research
is not that it is difficult to find out what is measured; the problem
is that it is difficult to find out what one intends to measure.
In this view, validation is not, and cannot be, a purely or even
mainly methodological enterprise. This does not mean that methodological and psychometric techniques are irrelevant to valida-

1068

BORSBOOM, MELLENBERGH, AND VAN HEERDEN

tion research but that the primary source for understanding how the
test works must be substantive and not methodological. Thus, we
consider it impossible to argue for test validity solely on the basis
of a multitrait, multimethod matrix. Such a matrix is helpful, but a
favorable matrix configuration is not constitutive of validity. What
is constitutive of validity is the existence of an attribute and its
causal impact on scores. Therefore, if one does not have an idea of
how the attribute variations produce variations in measurement
outcomes, one cannot have a clue as to whether the test measures
what it should measure. No table of correlations, no matter how
big, can be a substitute for knowledge of the processes that lead to
item responses. The knowledge of such processes must be given by
substantive psychological theory and cannot be based on methodological principles.
There are certainly tests for which a considerable body of
knowledge has accumulated in this respect. Examples of research
in this direction are, for instance, the cognitive modeling approach
in spatial reasoning tests (Embretson, 1994) and the latent class
approach in the detection of developmental stages (Jansen & Van
der Maas, 1997). Such approaches are distinct from mainstream
validation research because they look for evidence of validity in
different places. The balance scale task (Inhelder & Piaget, 1958;
Siegler, 1981) is a good example. In this task, which is intended to
measure the level of cognitive development, children are confronted with a balance scale. The balance scale has weights on both
sides, and children have to indicate whether the scale will tip and,
if so, to which side. The weights vary in number and are placed on
varying distances from the center of the balance scale. The point of
departure, in this work, is the formulation of a theory that characterizes the attribute. In this particular case, the theory says that
children go through four discrete stages in cognitive development
(Inhelder & Piaget, 1958). This theory is translated in a formal
model, in this case a latent class model, which conceptualizes
developmental stages as latent classes and development as an
ordered series of discrete transitions between these classes (Jansen
& Van der Maas, 1997).
Second, class membership is related to response behavior. Specifically, the theory formulates how children in different stages
will approach the items in the task. For instance, children in the
first stage will simply count the number of weights on both sides
of the center to reach a decision; children in the second stage will
take distances between the weights into account, but only if the
number of weights on each side of the balance scale are equal;
children in the third stage will incorporate both the number of
weights and the distance of weights from the center but will start
guessing if these cues conflict; and children in the fourth stage will
compare products of weights and distances on both sides of the
scale.
Third, these response strategies are linked to item response
patterns. This is possible because children in different stages make
different kinds of mistakes. Therefore, one can construct items for
which the response strategies give conflicting responses, so that on
some items, children in an earlier stage outperform children in a
later stage. Through this chain of theory, the classes can be
characterized with sufficient precision to allow for testing the
adequacy of the model against observed response patterns (Jansen
& Van der Maas, 1997, 2002). Here, the use of latent variable
modeling can provide an excellent method for testing the theory
against empirical data. The example shows how much can be

achieved through a coordinated pattern of theory, test construction,
and data analysis. It also shows how little remains of the validity
problem, which is virtually reduced to the question of whether this
theory of response behavior is true.
Now, the evidence for the validity of the balance scale test is not
conclusive, as evidence hardly ever is; both the theory of discrete
stage transitions and the number and character of the response
strategies are not settled issues. In the present context, however,
the point is not primarily that there is a correct theory of response
behavior. The important point is that there is a theory of response
behavior at all. And when such a theory is present, the problem of
validity loses much of its mysterious quality and elusive character
because it is clear what must be the case in reality for this test to
be valid for the developmental stages in question. The clarity is
achieved because the entire chain of events that leads from the
attribute to the test scores is characterized. We know what has to
happen between item administration and item response for the test
to be valid. In other words, we know how the test is supposed to
work.
Contrast this with mainstream validation research, for example,
with research on personality tests. We do now have the methodology to test the hypothesis that the covariation between item
scores is due to a number of common causes, namely confirmatory
factor analysis (Jöreskog, 1971). However, as is often the case in
psychology, we have beautiful models but too little theory to go
with them. We can formulate the hypothesis that Extraversion is
the common cause of the scores on a number of different items of
subtests, but there is no good theory available to specify how
different levels of Extraversion lead to different item responses.
Thus, there is, at present, no detailed hypothesis of how the causal
effect of Extraversion on the test scores is being conveyed. The
causal model may be set up, but the arrows in it are devoid of
interpretation. This does not show that personality tests are invalid
or that no such thing as Extraversion exists. However, it does
preclude any firm treatment of the problem of validity. The reason
for this is that researchers expect to get an answer to the question
of what the test measures, without having a hypothesis on how the
test works. If one attempts to sidestep the most important part of
test behavior, which is what happens between item administration
and item response, then one will find no clarity in tables of
correlation coefficients. No amount of empirical data can fill a
theoretical gap.
It is disconcerting to find that a large proportion of test research
is characterized by an almost complete absence of theories of
response behavior and that so few researchers recognize that the
problem of psychological measurement is not a matter of following the “right” methodological rules but of tackling one of the most
challenging problems in psychology: How do psychological characteristics relate to empirical observations? Fortunately, there are
various recent developments in theoretically inspired modeling
(e.g., Embretson, 1994, 1998; Jansen & Van der Maas, 1997;
Mislevy & Verhelst, 1990; Süss, Oberauer, Wittmann, Wilhelm, &
Schulze, 2002; Wilhelm & Schulze, 2002) that show how much is
gained when one starts to consider the processes involved in item
response behavior and to utilize advanced test theory models that
have been developed in the past century. However, studies that
proceed in this manner are still scarce throughout psychology, and
it is therefore no surprise that the problem of validity is so

THE CONCEPT OF VALIDITY

widespread. What we hope to have shown is that it need not be that
way.

Discussion
We have proposed a simple conception of validity that concerns
the question of whether the attribute to be measured produces
variations in the measurement outcomes. This theory of validity is
based on ontology, reference, and causation, rather than on epistemology, meaning, and correlation. Although epistemological
issues are central to validation and consequential issues are central
to test use, both are considered irrelevant to the concept and
definition of validity itself. The conjunction of these theses produces a viewpoint that is almost diametrically opposed to the
currently endorsed conceptions of validity, which state that the
concept applies to evaluative judgments of test score interpretations, that it depends on nomological networks, that it is complex
and faceted, and that social, ethical, and political consequences are
relevant to validity. We do not see the need for a unified validity
concept (Ellis & Blustein, 1991; Messick, 1989; Moss, 1992;
Shepard, 1993) because we think there is nothing to unify. The
consequences of the proposed conception are far-reaching, but the
overall picture that emerges is consistent and fits the intuitive
notions most researchers have about validity quite well. We therefore think that a realist, causation-based concept of validity is a
viable alternative to the current consensus in validity theory.
The philosophical assumptions involved in the present conception are strong—stronger, perhaps, than in any previous discussion
of validity. Therefore, it may be argued that by invoking realism
about psychological attributes and causal relations, we are engaging in metaphysical speculation. We concede this point, but it does
not bother us. We think that the very idea that metaphysics and
science are necessarily opposed is a relic that stems from logical
positivism; in fact, we think that science is the best way of doing
metaphysics we know. To the hard-boiled empiricist, we reply that
it is naive to think that any scientific theory can get off the ground
without introducing an ontological picture of how the world works,
which will always contain metaphysical ingredients. Given that
this is the case, the metaphysics better be good.
Other objections may come from the postmodern or social
constructivist camp. An obvious one is the objection that psychological attributes are social constructions and that we are engaging
in an unjustified reification of such constructions. However, that a
realist ontology is necessary to apply the concept of validity says
nothing about the kind of attributes that can and cannot be invoked.
Now, if the supposition that psychological attributes are social
constructions is meant in an eliminative way and thus is taken to
mean that such attributes do not exist, then they cannot have any
causal effects whatsoever, and it is impossible to measure them.
However, this is not an argument against the semantics of validity
as discussed in this article; it rather expresses the opinion that
psychological tests are invalid, and it does so in terms of the very
same semantics we have proposed. Another position could be
taken by researchers who are prepared to defend the thesis that
psychological attributes do exist, although they exist as social
constructions. Such researchers may hypothesize that these social
constructions in fact do have causal effects, for instance on measurement outcomes. In that case, the concept of validity applies as
usual, and it invites constructivists to work out the causal chains

1069

involved in the process of social construction. In our view, neither
eliminative nor “liberal realist” conceptions of social constructivism provide an argument against the proposed semantics.
There are various other questions about validity that stand in
need of further theoretical investigation. For instance, although the
present validity concept can be applied directly to reflective latent
variable models used in psychological measurement, it seems that
formative models (Bollen & Lennox, 1991; Edwards & Bagozzi,
2000) do not allow for such application. In such models, the
observed indicators are not considered to be causally affected by
the latent variable but, rather, to cause such a latent variable. In this
case, it is difficult to see how these observed indicators could be
conceptualized as measures of the attribute in question because the
arrows between the attribute and the observations run in the
opposite direction. Consider, as an example of a construct typically
addressed with formative models, socioeconomic status (SES). A
formative model conceptualizes SES as a latent variable that is
regressed on indicators such as annual income, educational level,
and so on. Now, it would be odd to ask whether the question What
is your annual income? is a valid measure of SES because according to our theory, this question does not measure SES; rather, it
measures one of the determinants of SES, namely annual income.
And at this level, one can consistently ask the question of validity,
namely when one asks whether variation in annual income has a
causal effect on variation in the responses to the question.
One may also imagine that there could be procedures to measure
constructs like SES reflectively—for example, through a series of
questions like How high are you up the social ladder? Thus, that
attributes like SES are typically addressed with formative models
does not mean that they could not be assessed reflectively, in
which case the concept of validity, as defined here, can be applied.
However, validity does not apply to the relation between formative
indicators and the corresponding constructs. Because validity explicitly concerns the relation of measurement, one wonders
whether it is appropriate to view formative models as measurement
models in the first place. They might be better conceptualized as
models for indexing or summarizing the indicators or as causal
models that do not involve a measurement structure for which one
can ask the question of validity as defined in this article. It would
be interesting to further inquire how such models relate to the logic
of measurement.
A second issue concerns the distinction between intraindividual
and interindividual measurement structures (Borsboom et al.,
2003). In our view, the proposed validity concept can be applied to
both of these levels, although it is important not to confuse them.
If the measurement outcomes are obtained in a group of people at
a single time point, then the variation in scores ranges over people,
and the only thing that can cause variation over people is something that also varies over people. Conversely, if the variation in
scores ranges over time within a person, then the cause of this
variation must also vary over time within that person. One’s
developmental trajectory on a Raven (1938) item does not cause
differences between people on responses to that item, and that
there exists a given source of differences between people does not
cause one’s response to the Raven item. The reason that such
suppositions do not make sense is not that the Raven is invalid
either for measuring developmental processes or for measuring
differences between people; it could be valid for both. The problem is rather that there is a mismatch between the domain of

1070

BORSBOOM, MELLENBERGH, AND VAN HEERDEN

variation in the cause and the domain of variation in the effect. It
may be countered that, assuming complete homogeneity of processes across persons, it is possible to make inferences about the
structure of intraindividual processes on the basis of the measurement of interindividual differences or the other way around. This
is true. However, that one can generalize to another domain does
not mean that one has measured something in that domain. It is
simply impossible to measure intraindividual variation in attributes
with interindividual variation in scores or to measure interindividual variation in attributes with intraindividual variation in
scores. This is not an empirical hypothesis that could be refuted by
research but a matter of logic. Nevertheless, the validity concept
applies with equal force to measurement at the interindividual and
the intraindividual level—although not necessarily at the same
time or with respect to the same attributes.
A third theoretical consequence of the present article is that it
raises the question of whether validity should be conceptualized as
a matter of degree. This has become more or less a dogma of
construct validity. Cronbach and Meehl (1955) stated that “the
problem is not to conclude that the test ‘is valid’ for measuring the
construct variable” but that “the task is to state as definitely as
possible the degree of validity” (p. 290). Similarly, Messick (1989)
stated that “it is important to note that validity is a matter of
degree, not all or none” (p. 13). However, the question of whether
an attribute exists and has causal impact on the observations can be
answered by a simple “yes” or “no.” Thus, the present theory is
naturally compatible with the possibility of conceptualizing validity as a qualitative, rather than quantitative, concept, as is commonly done with the similar concept of truth. It would be worthwhile to investigate this possibility further.
These ideas point to another issue that deserves further study.
Namely, how does validity line up with other test theoretic concepts like reliability, unidimensionality, measurement invariance,
and bias? For instance, if validity is conceptualized as a qualitative
concept, it would hardly make sense to say that reliability provides
an upper bound for validity (Lord & Novick, 1968). One would
rather say that validity is a necessary condition for reliability
estimates to make sense. This is not implausible because reliability
is an index of measurement precision (Mellenbergh, 1996), and it
does seem strange to say that “Test X measures intelligence with
a certain precision” but that “The test does not measure intelligence.” Similarly, the concept of validity as defined here does not
imply absence of bias in tests, which is a commonly held idea (but
see Borsboom, Mellenbergh, & Van Heerden, 2002). More generally, our definition suggests a decoupling of the terms valid
measurement and optimal measurement, which are often seen as
identical. In our definition, a valid test need not be the best
available test, and not all valid tests are on equal footing. Two tests
may both be valid, but one may be more reliable. One may
consider the possibility that psychometric characteristics like reliability, unidimensionality, and measurement invariance do not
provide necessary conditions for valid measurement, as is often
thought, but rather presuppose validity as defined in this article.
This would mean that validity is not in the same league as other
test theoretic concepts. As has been suggested in this article, the
reason may be that validity is not so much a methodological as a
substantive problem.
The validity concept proposed here has been stripped of all
excess baggage. The benefit is that this lends substantial clarity

and force to the concept, but the price is that it covers less ground.
For instance, when one claims validity, one is not thereby claiming
reliability, predictive adequacy, or absence of bias. However, these
are important properties, and one may still want to introduce a kind
of umbrella term to express one’s opinion on the overall quality of
a testing procedure. We suggest that to express this judgment,
overall quality is not such a bad choice. The accompanying plain
English terms better and worse further allow one to express one’s
opinion that some tests are better than others in a given situation,
without having the connotation of precision and objectivity that the
jargon of degrees of validity suggests. Which testing procedure is
best for a person depends on that person’s situation and goals, on
a very diverse set of test properties that are sometimes desirable
and sometimes not, and on the amount of time and money at that
person’s disposal. But, if one wants to measure something, then
one’s test must be valid for that something— however suboptimal
it may be with respect to properties like reliability. This distinction
should not be blurred. Also, the usage of better and worse does not
interfere with the concept of validity as defined here, and perhaps
most important, such usage emphasizes that in saying “the WAIS
is a good test,” one is expressing one’s enthusiasm about the WAIS
rather than proposing a refutable hypothesis.
In conclusion, the present conception of validity is more powerful, simple, and effective than the consensus position in the
validity literature. However, it does seem that it puts conventional
thinking on test theory on its head, which necessitates further
investigation of the way validity relates to psychometrics, philosophy of science, and substantive psychological theory. Also, the
integration of psychological theory, test construction, and data
analysis, advocated here as the best way to tackle the problem of
validity, needs to be worked out in greater detail. It would be
worthwhile to develop theories of response behavior in different
domains, which could lead to a greater degree of integration
between psychometrics and psychology than exists at present.
Psychometric techniques and models have great potential for improving measurement practice in psychology, but only if they are
driven by a substantive theory of response processes. We think
that, with such theory in hand, the problem of validity will turn out
to be less difficult than is commonly thought.

References
Bechtold, H. P. (1959). Construct validity: A critique. American Psychologist, 14, 619 – 629.
Bollen, K. A. (1989). Structural equations with latent variables. New
York: Wiley.
Bollen, K. A., & Lennox, R. (1991). Conventional wisdom on measurement: A structural equation perspective. Psychological Bulletin, 110,
305–314.
Borsboom, D., Mellenbergh, G. J., & Van Heerden, J. (2002). Different
kinds of DIF: A distinction between absolute and relative forms of
measurement invariance and bias. Applied Psychological Measurement,
26, 433– 450.
Borsboom, D., Mellenbergh, G. J., & Van Heerden, J. (2003). The theoretical status of latent variables. Psychological Review, 110, 203–219.
Campbell, N. R. (1920). Physics, the elements. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Cattell, R. B. (1946). Description and measurement of personality. New
York: World Book Company.
Cervone, D. (1997). Social-cognitive mechanisms and personality coher-

THE CONCEPT OF VALIDITY
ence: Self-knowledge, situational beliefs, and cross-situational coherence in perceived self-efficacy. Psychological Science, 8, 43–50.
Cronbach, L. J. (1980). Validity on parole: How can we go straight. In
W. B. Schrader (Ed.), New directions for testing and measurement:
Measuring achievement over a decade. (pp. 99 –108). San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
Cronbach, L. J. (1988). Five perspectives on validation argument. In H.
Wainer & H. Braun (Eds.), Test validity (pp. 3–17). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Cronbach, L. J., & Meehl, P. E. (1955). Construct validity in psychological
tests. Psychological Bulletin, 52, 281–302.
Edwards, J. R., & Bagozzi, R. P. (2000). On the nature and direction of
relationships between constructs and measures. Psychological Methods,
5, 155–174.
Ellis, M. V., & Blustein, D. L. (1991). The unificationist view: A context
for validity. Journal of Counseling and Development, 69, 561–563.
Embretson, S. E. (1983). Construct validity: Construct representation versus nomothetic span. Psychological Bulletin, 93, 179 –197.
Embretson, S. E. (1994). Applications of cognitive design systems to test
development. In C. R. Reynolds (Ed.), Cognitive assessment: A multidisciplinary perspective. (pp. 107–135). New York: Plenum Press.
Embretson, S. E. (1998). A cognitive design system approach for generating valid tests: Approaches to abstract reasoning. Psychological Methods, 3, 300 –396.
Frege, G. (1952). On sense and reference. In P. Geach & M. Black (Eds.),
Translations of the philosophical writings of Gottlob Frege (pp. 42–55).
Oxford, England: Blackwell. (Original work published 1892)
Glymour, C. (2001). The mind’s arrows. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Guilford, J. P. (1946). New standards for test evaluation. Educational and
Psychological Measurement, 6, 427– 439.
Inhelder, B., & Piaget, J. (1958). The growth of logical thinking from
childhood to adolescence. New York: Basic Books.
Jansen, B. R. J., & Van der Maas, H. L. J. (1997). Statistical tests of the
rule assessment methodology by latent class analysis. Developmental
Review, 17, 321–357.
Jansen, B. R. J., & Van der Maas, H. L. J. (2002). The development of
children’s rule use on the balance scale task. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 81, 383– 416.
Jöreskog, K. G. (1971). Statistical analysis of sets of congeneric tests.
Psychometrika, 36, 109 –133.
Kagan, J. (1988). The meanings of personality predicates. American Psychologist, 43, 614 – 620.
Kane, M. T. (2001). Current concerns in validity theory. Journal of
Educational Measurement, 38, 319 –342.
Kelley, T. L. (1927). Interpretation of educational measurements. New
York: Macmillan.
Krantz, D. H., Luce, R. D., Suppes, P., & Tversky, A. (1971). Foundations
of measurement (Vol. I). New York: Academic Press.
Loevinger, J. (1957). Objective tests as instruments of psychological theory. Psychological Reports, 3, 635– 694.
Lord, F. M., & Novick, M. R. (1968). Statistical theories of mental test
scores. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Meehl, P. E. (1978). Theoretical risks and tabular asterisks: Sir Karl, Sir
Ronald, and the slow progress of soft psychology. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 46, 806 – 834.

1071

Mellenbergh, G. J. (1996). Measurement precision in test score and item
response models. Psychological Methods, 1, 293–299.
Messick, S. (1981). Constructs and their vicissitudes in educational and
psychological measurement. Psychological Bulletin, 89, 575–588.
Messick, S. (1989). Validity. In R. L. Linn (Ed.), Educational measurement (pp. 13–103). Washington, DC: American Council on Education
and National Council on Measurement in Education.
Messick, S. (1998). Test validity: A matter of consequence. Social Indicators Research, 45, 35– 44.
Michell, J. (1999). Measurement in psychology: A critical history of a
methodological concept. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mislevy, R. J., & Verhelst, N. (1990). Modeling item responses when
different subjects employ different solution strategies. Psychometrika,
55, 195–215.
Moss, P. A. (1992). Shifting conceptions of validity in educational measurement: Implications for performance assessment. Review of Educational Research, 62, 229 –258.
Narens, L., & Luce, R. D. (1986). Measurement: The theory of numerical
assignments. Psychological Bulletin, 99, 166 –180.
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality: Models, reasoning, and inference. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Raven, J. C. (1938). Progressive matrices. London: H.K. Lewis.
Schmidt, F. L., & Hunter, J. E. (1999). Theory testing and measurement
error. Intelligence, 27, 183–198.
Shepard, L. A. (1993). Evaluating test validity. Review of Research in
Education, 19, 405– 450.
Shepard, L. A. (1997). The centrality of test use and consequences for test
validity. Educational Measurement: Issues and Practice, 16, 5– 8.
Siegler, R. S. (1981). Developmental sequences within and between concepts. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development,
46, 1–74.
Smits, N., Mellenbergh, G. J., & Vorst, H. C. M. (2002). The measurement
versus prediction paradox in the application of planned missingness to
psychological and educational tests. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Suppe, F. (1977). The structure of scientific theories. Urbana: University of
Illinois Press.
Süss, H., Oberauer, K., Wittmann, W. W., Wilhelm, O., & Schulze, R.
(2002). Working-memory capacity explains reasoning ability—and a
little bit more. Intelligence, 30, 261–288.
Trout, J. D. (1999). Measurement. In W. H. Newton-Smith (Ed.), A
companion to the philosophy of science (pp. 265–276). Oxford, England:
Blackwell.
Wechsler, D. (1955). Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale. New York: Psychological Corporation.
Westen, D., & Rosenthal, R. (2003). Quantifying construct validity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 608 – 618.
Wilhelm, O., & Schulze, R. (2002). The relation of speeded and unspeeded
reasoning with mental speed. Intelligence, 30, 537–554.

Received September 11, 2002
Revision received November 11, 2003
Accepted November 13, 2003 䡲

