A large annotated corpus for learning natural language inference

∗

Samuel R. Bowman∗†
sbowman@stanford.edu

Gabor Angeli†‡
angeli@stanford.edu

Christopher Potts∗
cgpotts@stanford.edu

Christopher D. Manning∗†‡
manning@stanford.edu

Stanford Linguistics

†

Stanford NLP Group

Abstract

Stanford Computer Science

for approaches employing distributed word and
phrase representations. Distributed representations excel at capturing relations based in similarity, and have proven effective at modeling simple
dimensions of meaning like evaluative sentiment
(e.g., Socher et al. 2013), but it is less clear that
they can be trained to support the full range of
logical and commonsense inferences required for
NLI (Bowman et al., 2015; Weston et al., 2015b;
Weston et al., 2015a). In a SemEval 2014 task
aimed at evaluating distributed representations for
NLI, the best-performing systems relied heavily
on additional features and reasoning capabilities
(Marelli et al., 2014a).
Our ultimate objective is to provide an empirical evaluation of learning-centered approaches to
NLI, advancing the case for NLI as a tool for
the evaluation of domain-general approaches to
semantic representation. However, in our view,
existing NLI corpora do not permit such an assessment. They are generally too small for training modern data-intensive, wide-coverage models,
many contain sentences that were algorithmically
generated, and they are often beset with indeterminacies of event and entity coreference that significantly impact annotation quality.
To address this, this paper introduces the Stanford Natural Language Inference (SNLI) corpus,
a collection of sentence pairs labeled for entailment, contradiction, and semantic independence.
At 570,152 sentence pairs, SNLI is two orders of
magnitude larger than all other resources of its
type. And, in contrast to many such resources,
all of its sentences and labels were written by humans in a grounded, naturalistic context. In a separate validation phase, we collected four additional
judgments for each label for 56,941 of the examples. Of these, 98% of cases emerge with a threeannotator consensus, and 58% see a unanimous
consensus from all five annotators.
In this paper, we use this corpus to evaluate

Understanding entailment and contradiction is fundamental to understanding natural language, and inference about entailment and contradiction is a valuable testing ground for the development of semantic representations. However, machine
learning research in this area has been dramatically limited by the lack of large-scale
resources. To address this, we introduce
the Stanford Natural Language Inference
corpus, a new, freely available collection
of labeled sentence pairs, written by humans doing a novel grounded task based
on image captioning. At 570K pairs, it
is two orders of magnitude larger than
all other resources of its type. This increase in scale allows lexicalized classifiers to outperform some sophisticated existing entailment models, and it allows a
neural network-based model to perform
competitively on natural language inference benchmarks for the first time.

1

‡

Introduction

The semantic concepts of entailment and contradiction are central to all aspects of natural language meaning (Katz, 1972; van Benthem, 2008),
from the lexicon to the content of entire texts.
Thus, natural language inference (NLI) — characterizing and using these relations in computational
systems (Fyodorov et al., 2000; Condoravdi et al.,
2003; Bos and Markert, 2005; Dagan et al., 2006;
MacCartney and Manning, 2009) — is essential in
tasks ranging from information retrieval to semantic parsing to commonsense reasoning.
NLI has been addressed using a variety of techniques, including those based on symbolic logic,
knowledge bases, and neural networks. In recent
years, it has become an important testing ground
632

Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 632–642,
Lisbon, Portugal, 17-21 September 2015. c 2015 Association for Computational Linguistics.

A man inspects the uniform of a figure in some East
Asian country.

contradiction The man is sleeping

An older and younger man smiling.

neutral

CCCCC
NNENN

Two men are smiling and laughing at the cats playing on the floor.

A black race car starts up in front of a crowd of
people.

contradiction A man is driving down a lonely road.

A soccer game with multiple males playing.

entailment

CCCCC

Some men are playing a sport.

EEEEE

A smiling costumed woman is holding an umbrella.

neutral
NNECN

A happy woman in a fairy costume holds an umbrella.

Table 1: Randomly chosen examples from the development section of our new corpus, shown with both
the selected gold labels and the full set of labels (abbreviated) from the individual annotators, including
(in the first position) the label used by the initial author of the pair.
a variety of models for natural language inference, including rule-based systems, simple linear classifiers, and neural network-based models.
We find that two models achieve comparable performance: a feature-rich classifier model and a
neural network model centered around a Long
Short-Term Memory network (LSTM; Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber 1997). We further evaluate the
LSTM model by taking advantage of its ready support for transfer learning, and show that it can be
adapted to an existing NLI challenge task, yielding
the best reported performance by a neural network
model and approaching the overall state of the art.

2

plementary training data. Outside the domain of
sentence-level entailment, Levy et al. (2014) introduce a large corpus of semi-automatically annotated entailment examples between subject–verb–
object relation triples, and the second release of
the Paraphrase Database (Pavlick et al., 2015) includes automatically generated entailment annotations over a large corpus of pairs of words and
short phrases.
Existing resources suffer from a subtler issue
that impacts even projects using only humanprovided annotations: indeterminacies of event
and entity coreference lead to insurmountable indeterminacy concerning the correct semantic label (de Marneffe et al. 2008 §4.3; Marelli et al.
2014b). For an example of the pitfalls surrounding entity coreference, consider the sentence pair
A boat sank in the Pacific Ocean and A boat sank
in the Atlantic Ocean. The pair could be labeled
as a contradiction if one assumes that the two sentences refer to the same single event, but could
also be reasonably labeled as neutral if that assumption is not made. In order to ensure that our
labeling scheme assigns a single correct label to
every pair, we must select one of these approaches
across the board, but both choices present problems. If we opt not to assume that events are
coreferent, then we will only ever find contradictions between sentences that make broad universal assertions, but if we opt to assume coreference,
new counterintuitive predictions emerge. For example, Ruth Bader Ginsburg was appointed to the
US Supreme Court and I had a sandwich for lunch
today would unintuitively be labeled as a contradiction, rather than neutral, under this assumption.
Entity coreference presents a similar kind of indeterminacy, as in the pair A tourist visited New

A new corpus for NLI

To date, the primary sources of annotated NLI corpora have been the Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE) challenge tasks.1 These are generally
high-quality, hand-labeled data sets, and they have
stimulated innovative logical and statistical models of natural language reasoning, but their small
size (fewer than a thousand examples each) limits
their utility as a testbed for learned distributed representations. The data for the SemEval 2014 task
called Sentences Involving Compositional Knowledge (SICK) is a step up in terms of size, but
only to 4,500 training examples, and its partly
automatic construction introduced some spurious
patterns into the data (Marelli et al. 2014a, §6).
The Denotation Graph entailment set (Young et
al., 2014) contains millions of examples of entailments between sentences and artificially constructed short phrases, but it was labeled using
fully automatic methods, and is noisy enough that
it is probably suitable only as a source of sup1
http://aclweb.org/aclwiki/index.php?
title=Textual_Entailment_Resource_Pool

633

York and A tourist visited the city. Assuming
coreference between New York and the city justifies labeling the pair as an entailment, but without that assumption the city could be taken to refer
to a specific unknown city, leaving the pair neutral. This kind of indeterminacy of label can be resolved only once the questions of coreference are
resolved.
With SNLI, we sought to address the issues of
size, quality, and indeterminacy. To do this, we
employed a crowdsourcing framework with the
following crucial innovations. First, the examples were grounded in specific scenarios, and the
premise and hypothesis sentences in each example were constrained to describe that scenario from
the same perspective, which helps greatly in controlling event and entity coreference.2 Second, the
prompt gave participants the freedom to produce
entirely novel sentences within the task setting,
which led to richer examples than we see with the
more proscribed string-editing techniques of earlier approaches, without sacrificing consistency.
Third, a subset of the resulting sentences were sent
to a validation task aimed at providing a highly reliable set of annotations over the same data, and at
identifying areas of inferential uncertainty.

We will show you the caption for a photo. We will not
show you the photo. Using only the caption and what
you know about the world:
• Write one alternate caption that is definitely a
true description of the photo. Example: For the
caption “Two dogs are running through a field.”
you could write “There are animals outdoors.”
• Write one alternate caption that might be a true
description of the photo. Example: For the caption “Two dogs are running through a field.” you
could write “Some puppies are running to catch a
stick.”
• Write one alternate caption that is definitely a
false description of the photo. Example: For the
caption “Two dogs are running through a field.”
you could write “The pets are sitting on a couch.”
This is different from the maybe correct category
because it’s impossible for the dogs to be both
running and sitting.

Figure 1: The instructions used on Mechanical
Turk for data collection.

We used Amazon Mechanical Turk for data collection. In each individual task (each HIT), a
worker was presented with premise scene descriptions from a pre-existing corpus, and asked to
supply hypotheses for each of our three labels—
entailment, neutral, and contradiction—forcing
the data to be balanced among these classes.
The instructions that we provided to the workers are shown in Figure 1. Below the instructions
were three fields for each of three requested sentences, corresponding to our entailment, neutral,
and contradiction labels, a fourth field (marked
optional) for reporting problems, and a link to an
FAQ page. That FAQ grew over the course of
data collection. It warned about disallowed techniques (e.g., reusing the same sentence for many
different prompts, which we saw in a few cases),
provided guidance concerning sentence length and

complexity (we did not enforce a minimum length,
and we allowed bare NPs as well as full sentences), and reviewed logistical issues around payment timing. About 2,500 workers contributed.
For the premises, we used captions from the
Flickr30k corpus (Young et al., 2014), a collection
of approximately 160k captions (corresponding to
about 30k images) collected in an earlier crowdsourced effort.3 The captions were not authored
by the photographers who took the source images,
and they tend to contain relatively literal scene descriptions that are suited to our approach, rather
than those typically associated with personal photographs (as in their example: Our trip to the
Olympic Peninsula). In order to ensure that the label for each sentence pair can be recovered solely
based on the available text, we did not use the images at all during corpus collection.
Table 2 reports some key statistics about the collected corpus, and Figure 2 shows the distributions
of sentence lengths for both our source hypotheses
and our newly collected premises. We observed
that while premise sentences varied considerably
in length, hypothesis sentences tended to be as

2
Issues of coreference are not completely solved, but
greatly mitigated. For example, with the premise sentence
A dog is lying in the grass, a worker could safely assume that
the dog is the most prominent thing in the photo, and very
likely the only dog, and build contradicting sentences assuming reference to the same dog.

3
We additionally include about 4k sentence pairs from
a pilot study in which the premise sentences were instead
drawn from the VisualGenome corpus (under construction;
visualgenome.org). These examples appear only in the
training set, and have pair identifiers prefixed with vg in our
corpus.

2.1

Data collection

634

26514
93600
37434
85851
44028
61359
49245
46711
50919
33241
set sizes:
48363 Data22844
Training
pairs
43314
15994
Development
38121
11047 pairs
33183 Test pairs
7601

7
8
9
10
11

Premise

Hypothesis

100,000
12
550,152
90,000
13
80,000
10,000
14
70,000
10,000
15
60,000
27621
5312
16
Sentence
length:
50,000
23250
3732
17
Premise mean token count
14.1
40,000
20247
2631
18
30,000
Hypothesis
mean
token
count
8.3
18513
1878
19
20,000
16386 Parser1325
20
output:
10,000
13746 Premise911
21
‘S’-rooted parses
74.0%
0
12066 Hypothesis
642 ‘S’-rooted parses
22
0
5
10 15 20 25 30 35 40
88.9%
Sentence length (tokens)
9183 Distinct449
23
words (ignoring case)
37,026
7131
357
24
Figure 2: The distribution of sentence length.
6198
217
25
Table 2: Key statistics for the raw sentence
pairs
5007
168
26
in SNLI. Since the two halves of each pair were
3963
138
27
chosen as the gold label. If there was no such concollected separately, we report some statistics for
3438
84
28
sensus, which occurred in about 2% of cases, we
both.
2631
67
29
assigned the placeholder label ‘-’. While these un1959
46
30
labeled examples are included in the corpus dis1956
26
31
short as possible while still providing enough intribution, they are unlikely to be helpful for the
1434
31
32
formation
to
yield
a
clear
judgment,
clustering
at
standard NLI classification task, and we do not in1086
23
33
around seven16words. We also observed
clude them in either training or evaluation in the
912
34 that the
bulk
of
the
sentences
from
both
sources
were
synexperiments that we discuss in this paper.
897
19
35
tactically complete
rather than fragments,
The results of this validation process are sum774
8
36 and the
frequency with
marized in Table 3. Nearly all of the examples
453
12 which the parser produces
37 a parse
rooted with an4‘S’ (sentence) node attests
618
38 to this.
received a majority label, indicating broad con291
5
39
sensus about the nature of the data and categories.
2.2 Data validation
330
2
40
The gold-labeled examples are very nearly evenly
249
4
41
distributed across the three labels. The Fleiss
In order to measure the quality of our corpus,
180
2
42
κ scores (computed over every example with a
and in order to construct maximally useful test225
1
43
full five annotations) are likely to be conservative
ing and development
sets, we performed
an addi162
1
44
given our large and unevenly distributed pool of
tional
round
of
validation
for
about
10%
of
our
108
1
48
annotators, but they still provide insights about the
data.
This validation
phase followed51the same
87
1
levels of disagreement across the three semantic
basic
task
60 form as 2the Mechanical Turk labeling
55
classes. This disagreement likely reflects not just
used
to
label
the
SICK
entailment
data:
we
pre36
1
56
the limitations of large crowdsourcing efforts but
sented workers1 with pairs of sentences60in batches
90
also the uncertainty inherent in naturalistic NLI.
of21five, and 1
asked them to choose a 62
single label
Regardless, the overall rate of agreement is ex66
for each pair. We supplied each pair to four an51
tremely high, suggesting that the corpus is suffinotators, yielding five labels per pair including the
36
ciently high quality to pose a challenging but reallabel used by the original author. The instructions
24
istic machine learning task.
were similar to the instructions for initial data col63
lection shown in Figure 1, and linked to a similar
18
2.3 The distributed corpus
FAQ. Though we initially used a very restrictive
15
qualification (based on past approval rate) to seTable 1 shows a set of randomly chosen validated
6
lect
workers
for
the
validation
task,
we
nonetheexamples from the development set with their la27
less
discovered
(and
deleted)
some
instances
of
bels. Qualitatively, we find the data that we col6
random
guessing
in
an
early
batch
of
work,
and
lected draws fairly extensively on commonsense
3
subsequently instituted a fully closed qualification
knowledge, and that hypothesis and premise sen3
restricted to about 30 trusted workers.
tences often differ structurally in significant ways,
3
6For each pair that we validated, we assigned a
suggesting that there is room for improvement be3
yond superficial word alignment models. We also
gold label. If any one of the three labels was cho3 by at least three of the five annotators, it was
find the sentences that we collected to be largely
sen
6
6
635
18
15
3
15
Number of sentences

7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72

General:
Validated pairs
Pairs w/ unanimous gold label

56,951
58.3%

Individual annotator label agreement:
Individual label = gold label
89.0%
Individual label = author’s label
85.8%

SICK

RTE-3

Edit Distance Based

71.9

65.4

61.9

Classifier Based

72.2

71.4

61.5

75.0

78.8

63.6

Table 4: 2-class test accuracy for two simple
baseline systems included in the Excitement Open
Platform, as well as SICK and RTE results for a
model making use of more sophisticated lexical
resources.

0.77
0.72
0.60
0.70

ticular, since it is dramatically larger than any existing corpus of comparable quality, we expect it to
be suitable for training parameter-rich models like
neural networks, which have not previously been
competitive at this task. Our ability to evaluate
standard classifier-base NLI models, however, was
limited to those which were designed to scale to
SNLI’s size without modification, so a more complete comparison of approaches will have to wait
for future work. In this section, we explore the performance of three classes of models which could
scale readily: (i) models from a well-known NLI
system, the Excitement Open Platform; (ii) variants of a strong but simple feature-based classifier model, which makes use of both unlexicalized
and lexicalized features, and (iii) distributed representation models, including a baseline model and
neural network sequence models.

Table 3: Statistics for the validated pairs. The author’s label is the label used by the worker who
wrote the premise to create the sentence pair. A
gold label reflects a consensus of three votes from
among the author and the four annotators.
fluent, correctly spelled English, with a mix of
full sentences and caption-style noun phrase fragments, though punctuation and capitalization are
often omitted.
The corpus is available under a CreativeCommons Attribution-ShareAlike license, the same license used for the Flickr30k source captions. It
can be downloaded at:
nlp.stanford.edu/projects/snli/

3.1

Excitement Open Platform models

The first class of models is from the Excitement
Open Platform (EOP, Padó et al. 2014; Magnini
et al. 2014)—an open source platform for RTE research. EOP is a tool for quickly developing NLI
systems while sharing components such as common lexical resources and evaluation sets. We
evaluate on two algorithms included in the distribution: a simple edit-distance based algorithm
and a classifier-based algorithm, the latter both in
a bare form and augmented with EOP’s full suite
of lexical resources.
Our initial goal was to better understand the difficulty of the task of classifying SNLI corpus inferences, rather than necessarily the performance
of a state-of-the-art RTE system. We approached
this by running the same system on several data
sets: our own test set, the SICK test data, and the
standard RTE-3 test set (Giampiccolo et al., 2007).
We report results in Table 4. Each of the models

Partition We distribute the corpus with a prespecified train/test/development split. The test
and development sets contain 10k examples each.
Each original ImageFlickr caption occurs in only
one of the three sets, and all of the examples in the
test and development sets have been validated.
Parses The distributed corpus includes parses
produced by the Stanford PCFG Parser 3.5.2
(Klein and Manning, 2003), trained on the standard training set as well as on the Brown Corpus
(Francis and Kucera 1979), which we found to improve the parse quality of the descriptive sentences
and noun phrases found in the descriptions.

3

SNLI

+ Lexical Resources

Gold label/author’s label agreement:
Gold label = author’s label
91.2%
Gold label 6= author’s label
6.8%
No gold label (no 3 labels match)
2.0%
Fleiss κ:
contradiction
entailment
neutral
Overall

System

Our data as a platform for evaluation

The most immediate application for our corpus is
in developing models for the task of NLI. In par636

was separately trained on the training set of each
corpus. All models are evaluated only on 2-class
entailment. To convert 3-class problems like SICK
and SNLI to this setting, all instances of contradiction and unknown are converted to nonentailment.
This yields a most-frequent-class baseline accuracy of 66% on SNLI, and 71% on SICK. This is
intended primarily to demonstrate the difficulty of
the task, rather than necessarily the performance
of a state-of-the-art RTE system. The edit distance algorithm tunes the weight of the three caseinsensitive edit distance operations on the training set, after removing stop words. In addition
to the base classifier-based system distributed with
the platform, we train a variant which includes information from WordNet (Miller, 1995) and VerbOcean (Chklovski and Pantel, 2004), and makes
use of features based on tree patterns and dependency tree skeletons (Wang and Neumann, 2007).
3.2

System

SNLI
Train Test

SICK
Train Test

Lexicalized
Unigrams Only
Unlexicalized

99.7 78.2
93.1 71.6
49.4 50.4

90.4 77.8
88.1 77.0
69.9 69.6

Table 5: 3-class accuracy, training on either our
data or SICK, including models lacking crossbigram features (Feature 6), and lacking all lexical
features (Features 4–6). We report results both on
the test set and the training set to judge overfitting.
for removing all lexicalized features. On our large
corpus in particular, there is a substantial jump in
accuracy from using lexicalized features, and another from using the very sparse cross-bigram features. The latter result suggests that there is value
in letting the classifier automatically learn to recognize structures like explicit negations and adjective modification. A similar result was shown in
Wang and Manning (2012) for bigram features in
sentiment analysis.
It is surprising that the classifier performs as
well as it does without any notion of alignment
or tree transformations. Although we expect that
richer models would perform better, the results
suggest that given enough data, cross bigrams with
the noisy part-of-speech overlap constraint can
produce an effective model.

Lexicalized Classifier

Unlike the RTE datasets, SNLI’s size supports approaches which make use of rich lexicalized features. We evaluate a simple lexicalized classifier
to explore the ability of non-specialized models to
exploit these features in lieu of more involved language understanding. Our classifier implements 6
feature types; 3 unlexicalized and 3 lexicalized:
1. The BLEU score of the hypothesis with respect to the premise, using an n-gram length
between 1 and 4.
2. The length difference between the hypothesis
and the premise, as a real-valued feature.
3. The overlap between words in the premise
and hypothesis, both as an absolute count and
a percentage of possible overlap, and both
over all words and over just nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs.
4. An indicator for every unigram and bigram in
the hypothesis.
5. Cross-unigrams: for every pair of words
across the premise and hypothesis which
share a POS tag, an indicator feature over the
two words.
6. Cross-bigrams: for every pair of bigrams
across the premise and hypothesis which
share a POS tag on the second word, an indicator feature over the two bigrams.

3.3

Sentence embeddings and NLI

SNLI is suitably large and diverse to make it possible to train neural network models that produce
distributed representations of sentence meaning.
In this section, we compare the performance of
three such models on the corpus. To focus specifically on the strengths of these models at producing informative sentence representations, we use
sentence embedding as an intermediate step in the
NLI classification task: each model must produce
a vector representation of each of the two sentences without using any context from the other
sentence, and the two resulting vectors are then
passed to a neural network classifier which predicts the label for the pair. This choice allows us to
focus on existing models for sentence embedding,
and it allows us to evaluate the ability of those
models to learn useful representations of meaning (which may be independently useful for subsequent tasks), at the cost of excluding from con-

We report results in Table 5, along with ablation studies for removing the cross-bigram features (leaving only the cross-unigram feature) and
637

3-way softmax classifier
200d tanh layer
200d tanh layer
200d tanh layer
100d premise

100d hypothesis

sentence model
with premise input

sentence model
with hypothesis input

Sentence model

Train

Test

100d Sum of words
100d RNN
100d LSTM RNN

79.3
73.1
84.8

75.3
72.2
77.6

Table 6: Accuracy in 3-class classification on our
training and test sets for each model.
tence embedding models (though not to its internal
connections) with a fixed dropout rate. All models were implemented in a common framework for
this paper, and the implementations will be made
available at publication time.
The results are shown in Table 6. The sum
of words model performed slightly worse than
the fundamentally similar lexicalized classifier—
while the sum of words model can use pretrained
word embeddings to better handle rare words, it
lacks even the rudimentary sensitivity to word order that the lexicalized model’s bigram features
provide. Of the two RNN models, the LSTM’s
more robust ability to learn long-term dependencies serves it well, giving it a substantial advantage over the plain RNN, and resulting in performance that is essentially equivalent to the lexicalized classifier on the test set (LSTM performance
near the stopping iteration varies by up to 0.5%
between evaluation steps). While the lexicalized
model fits the training set almost perfectly, the gap
between train and test set accuracy is relatively
small for all three neural network models, suggesting that research into significantly higher capacity
versions of these models would be productive.

Figure 3: The neural network classification architecture: for each sentence embedding model evaluated in Tables 6 and 7, two identical copies of
the model are run with the two sentences as input,
and their outputs are used as the two 100d inputs
shown here.
sideration possible strong neural models for NLI
that directly compare the two inputs at the word or
phrase level.
Our neural network classifier, depicted in Figure 3 (and based on a one-layer model in Bowman et al. 2015), is simply a stack of three 200d
tanh layers, with the bottom layer taking the concatenated sentence representations as input and the
top layer feeding a softmax classifier, all trained
jointly with the sentence embedding model itself.
We test three sentence embedding models, each
set to use 100d phrase and sentence embeddings.
Our baseline sentence embedding model simply
sums the embeddings of the words in each sentence. In addition, we experiment with two simple
sequence embedding models: a plain RNN and an
LSTM RNN (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997).
The word embeddings for all of the models are
initialized with the 300d reference GloVe vectors
(840B token version, Pennington et al. 2014) and
fine-tuned as part of training. In addition, all
of the models use an additional tanh neural network layer to map these 300d embeddings into
the lower-dimensional phrase and sentence embedding space. All of the models are randomly
initialized using standard techniques and trained
using AdaDelta (Zeiler, 2012) minibatch SGD until performance on the development set stops improving. We applied L2 regularization to all models, manually tuning the strength coefficient λ for
each, and additionally applied dropout (Srivastava
et al., 2014) to the inputs and outputs of the sen-

3.4

Analysis and discussion

Figure 4 shows a learning curve for the LSTM and
the lexicalized and unlexicalized feature-based
models. It shows that the large size of the corpus
is crucial to both the LSTM and the lexicalized
model, and suggests that additional data would
yield still better performance for both. In addition, though the LSTM and the lexicalized model
show similar performance when trained on the current full corpus, the somewhat steeper slope for
the LSTM hints that its ability to learn arbitrarily structured representations of sentence meaning may give it an advantage over the more constrained lexicalized model on still larger datasets.
We were struck by the speed with which the
lexicalized classifier outperforms its unlexicalized
638

73.95
76.78
78.22

Unlexicalized

Lexicalized

this kind of inference through lexical cues can lead
them astray. Some of these examples have qualities reminiscent of Winograd schemas (Winograd,
1972; Levesque, 2013). For example, all the models wrongly predict entailment for A young girl
throws sand toward the ocean/A girl can’t stand
the ocean, presumably because of distributional
associations between throws and can’t stand.
Analysis of the models’ predictions also yields
insights into the extent to which they grapple with
event and entity coreference. For the most part, the
original image prompts contained a focal element
that the caption writer identified with a syntactic subject, following information structuring conventions associating subjects and topics in English
(Ward and Birner, 2004). Our annotators generally
followed suit, writing sentences that, while structurally diverse, share topic/focus (theme/rheme)
structure with their premises. This promotes a
coherent, situation-specific construal of each sentence pair. This is information that our models
can easily take advantage of, but it can lead them
astray. For instance, all of them stumble with the
amusingly simple case A woman prepares ingredients for a bowl of soup/A soup bowl prepares a
woman, in which prior expectations about parallelism are not met. Another headline example of
this type is A man wearing padded arm protection is being bitten by a German shepherd dog/A
man bit a dog, which all the models wrongly diagnose as entailment, though the sentences report
two very different stories. A model with access
to explicit information about syntactic or semantic
structure should perform better on cases like these.

LSTM

80

% Accuracy

70
60
50
40
30

1

10

100

1,000

10,000

100,000 1,000,000

Training pairs used (log scale)

Figure 4:
A learning curve showing how the
baseline classifiers and the LSTM perform when
trained to convergence on varied amounts of training data. The y-axis starts near a random-chance
accuracy of 33%. The minibatch size of 64 that
we used to tune the LSTM sets a lower bound on
data for that model.

counterpart. With only 100 training examples, the
cross-bigram classifier is already performing better. Empirically, we find that the top weighted
features for the classifier trained on 100 examples
tend to be high precision entailments; e.g., playing
→ outside (most scenes are outdoors), a banana
→ person eating. If relatively few spurious entailments get high weight—as it appears is the case—
then it makes sense that, when these do fire, they
boost accuracy in identifying entailments.
There are revealing patterns in the errors common to all the models considered here. Despite
the large size of the training corpus and the distributional information captured by GloVe initialization, many lexical relationships are still misanalyzed, leading to incorrect predictions of independent, even for pairs that are common in the training corpus like beach/surf and sprinter/runner.
Semantic mistakes at the phrasal level (e.g., predicting contradiction for A male is placing an
order in a deli/A man buying a sandwich at a
deli) indicate that additional attention to compositional semantics would pay off. However, many of
the persistent problems run deeper, to inferences
that depend on world knowledge and contextspecific inferences, as in the entailment pair A race
car driver leaps from a burning car/A race car
driver escaping danger, for which both the lexicalized classifier and the LSTM predict neutral.
In other cases, the models’ attempts to shortcut

4

Transfer learning with SICK

To the extent that successfully training a neural
network model like our LSTM on SNLI forces that
model to encode broadly accurate representations
of English scene descriptions and to build an entailment classifier over those relations, we should
expect it to be readily possible to adapt the trained
model for use on other NLI tasks. In this section,
we evaluate on the SICK entailment task using a
simple transfer learning method (Pratt et al., 1991)
and achieve competitive results.
To perform transfer, we take the parameters of
the LSTM RNN model trained on SNLI and use
them to initialize a new model, which is trained
from that point only on the training portion of
SICK. The only newly initialized parameters are
639

Training sets

Train

Test

5

Our data only
SICK only
Our data and SICK (transfer)

42.0
100.0
99.9

46.7
71.3
80.8

Natural languages are powerful vehicles for reasoning, and nearly all questions about meaningfulness in language can be reduced to questions of
entailment and contradiction in context. This suggests that NLI is an ideal testing ground for theories of semantic representation, and that training
for NLI tasks can provide rich domain-general semantic representations. To date, however, it has
not been possible to fully realize this potential due
to the limited nature of existing NLI resources.
This paper sought to remedy this with a new, largescale, naturalistic corpus of sentence pairs labeled
for entailment, contradiction, and independence.
We used this corpus to evaluate a range of models,
and found that both simple lexicalized models and
neural network models perform well, and that the
representations learned by a neural network model
on our corpus can be used to dramatically improve
performance on a standard challenge dataset. We
hope that SNLI presents valuable training data and
a challenging testbed for the continued application
of machine learning to semantic representation.

Table 7: LSTM 3-class accuracy on the SICK
train and test sets under three training regimes.

softmax layer parameters and the embeddings for
words that appear in SICK, but not in SNLI (which
are populated with GloVe embeddings as above).
We use the same model hyperparameters that were
used to train the original model, with the exception of the L2 regularization strength, which is
re-tuned. We additionally transfer the accumulators that are used by AdaDelta to set the learning rates. This lowers the starting learning rates,
and is intended to ensure that the model does not
learn too quickly in its first few epochs after transfer and destroy the knowledge accumulated in the
pre-transfer phase of training.

Conclusion

The results are shown in Table 7. Training
on SICK alone yields poor performance, and the
model trained on SNLI fails when tested on SICK
data, labeling more neutral examples as contradictions than correctly, possibly as a result of subtle
differences in how the labeling task was presented.
In contrast, transferring SNLI representations to
SICK yields the best performance yet reported for
an unaugmented neural network model, surpasses
the available EOP models, and approaches both
the overall state of the art at 84.6% (Lai and Hockenmaier, 2014) and the 84% level of interannotator agreement, which likely represents an approximate performance ceiling. This suggests that the
introduction of a large high-quality corpus makes
it possible to train representation-learning models
for sentence meaning that are competitive with the
best hand-engineered models on inference tasks.

Acknowledgments

We attempted to apply this same transfer evaluation technique to the RTE-3 challenge, but found
that the small training set (800 examples) did not
allow the model to adapt to the unfamiliar genre of
text used in that corpus, such that no training configuration yielded competitive performance. Further research on effective transfer learning on
small data sets with neural models might facilitate
improvements here.

References

We gratefully acknowledge support from a Google
Faculty Research Award, a gift from Bloomberg
L.P., the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA) Deep Exploration and Filtering of Text (DEFT) Program under Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) contract no. FA875013-2-0040, the National Science Foundation under grant no. IIS 1159679, and the Department
of the Navy, Office of Naval Research, under
grant no. N00014-10-1-0109. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of Google,
Bloomberg L.P., DARPA, AFRL NSF, ONR, or
the US government. We also thank our many excellent Mechanical Turk contributors.

Johan Bos and Katja Markert. 2005. Recognising
textual entailment with logical inference. In Proc.
EMNLP.
Samuel R. Bowman, Christopher Potts, and Christopher D. Manning. 2015. Recursive neural networks
can learn logical semantics. In Proc. of the 3rd
Workshop on Continuous Vector Space Models and
their Compositionality.

640

Marco Marelli, Luisa Bentivogli, Marco Baroni, Raffaella Bernardi, Stefano Menini, and Roberto Zamparelli. 2014a. SemEval-2014 task 1: Evaluation
of compositional distributional semantic models on
full sentences through semantic relatedness and textual entailment. In Proc. SemEval.

Timothy Chklovski and Patrick Pantel. 2004. VerbOcean: Mining the web for fine-grained semantic
verb relations. In Proc. EMNLP.
Cleo Condoravdi, Dick Crouch, Valeria de Paiva, Reinhard Stolle, and Daniel G. Bobrow. 2003. Entailment, intensionality and text understanding. In
Proc. of the HLT-NAACL 2003 Workshop on Text
Meaning.

Marco Marelli, Stefano Menini, Marco Baroni, Luisa
Bentivogli, Raffaella Bernardi, and Roberto Zamparelli. 2014b. A SICK cure for the evaluation
of compositional distributional semantic models. In
Proc. LREC.

Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2006. The PASCAL recognising textual entailment
challenge. In Machine learning challenges. Evaluating predictive uncertainty, visual object classification, and recognising tectual entailment, pages 177–
190. Springer.

George A Miller.
1995.
WordNet: a lexical
database for english. Communications of the ACM,
38(11):39–41.
Sebastian Padó, Tae-Gil Noh, Asher Stern, Rui Wang,
and Roberto Zanoli. 2014. Design and realization of
a modular architecture for textual entailment. Journal of Natural Language Engineering.

Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Anna N. Rafferty, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2008. Finding contradictions in text. In Proc. ACL.
W. Nelson Francis and Henry Kucera. 1979. Brown
corpus manual. Brown University.

Ellie Pavlick, Johan Bos, Malvina Nissim, Charley
Beller, Ben Van Durme, and Chris Callison-Burch.
2015. PPDB 2.0: Better paraphrase ranking, finegrained entailment relations, word embeddings, and
style classification. In Proc. ACL.

Yaroslav Fyodorov, Yoad Winter, and Nissim Francez.
2000. A natural logic inference system. In Proc.
of the 2nd Workshop on Inference in Computational
Semantics.

Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D
Manning. 2014. GloVe: Global vectors for word
representation. In Proc. EMNLP.

Danilo Giampiccolo, Bernardo Magnini, Ido Dagan,
and Bill Dolan. 2007. The third PASCAL recognizing textual entailment challenge. In Proc. of the
ACL-PASCAL workshop on textual entailment and
paraphrasing.

Lorien Y Pratt, Jack Mostow, Candace A Kamm, and
Ace A Kamm. 1991. Direct transfer of learned information among neural networks. In Proc. AAAI.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997.
Long short-term memory. Neural computation,
9(8):1735–1780.

Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Y Wu, Jason
Chuang, Christopher D Manning, Andrew Y Ng,
and Christopher Potts. 2013. Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment
treebank. In Proc. EMNLP.

Jerrold J. Katz. 1972. Semantic Theory. Harper &
Row, New York.

Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky,
Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. 2014.
Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks
from overfitting. JMLR.

Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Accurate unlexicalized parsing. In Proc. ACL.
Alice Lai and Julia Hockenmaier. 2014. Illinois-LH: A
denotational and distributional approach to semantics. In Proc. SemEval.

Johan van Benthem. 2008. A brief history of natural
logic. In M. Chakraborty, B. Löwe, M. Nath Mitra, and S. Sarukki, editors, Logic, Navya-Nyaya
and Applications: Homage to Bimal Matilal. College Publications.

Hector J. Levesque. 2013. On our best behaviour. In
Proc. AAAI.
Omer Levy, Ido Dagan, and Jacob Goldberger. 2014.
Focused entailment graphs for open IE propositions.
In Proc. CoNLL.

Sida I. Wang and Christopher D. Manning. 2012.
Baselines and bigrams: Simple, good sentiment and
topic classification. In Proc. ACL.

Bill MacCartney and Christopher D Manning. 2009.
An extended model of natural logic. In Proc. of the
Eighth International Conference on Computational
Semantics.

Rui Wang and Günter Neumann. 2007. Recognizing
textual entailment using sentence similarity based on
dependency tree skeletons. In ACL-PASCAL Workshop on Textual Entailment and Paraphrasing.

Bernardo Magnini, Roberto Zanoli, Ido Dagan, Kathrin
Eichler, Günter Neumann, Tae-Gil Noh, Sebastian
Pado, Asher Stern, and Omer Levy. 2014. The Excitement Open Platform for textual inferences. Proc.
ACL.

Gregory Ward and Betty Birner. 2004. Information
structure and non-canonical syntax. In Laurence R.
Horn and Gregory Ward, editors, Handbook of Pragmatics, pages 153–174. Blackwell, Oxford.

641

Jason Weston, Antoine Bordes, Sumit Chopra, and
Tomas Mikolov. 2015a. Towards AI-complete
question answering: A set of prerequisite toy tasks.
arXiv:1502.05698.
Jason Weston, Sumit Chopra, and Antoine Bordes.
2015b. Memory networks. In Proc. ICLR.
Terry Winograd. 1972. Understanding natural language. Cognitive Psychology, 3(1):1–191.
Peter Young, Alice Lai, Micah Hodosh, and Julia
Hockenmaier. 2014. From image descriptions to visual denotations: New similarity metrics for semantic inference over event descriptions. TACL, 2:67–
78.
Matthew D. Zeiler.
2012.
ADADELTA: an
adaptive learning rate method.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1212.5701.

642

