TYPE Original Research
PUBLISHED 21 February 2025
DOI 10.3389/frsps.2025.1460277

OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY

Youyou Wu,
University College London, United Kingdom

Validating the use of large
language models for
psychological text classiﬁcation

REVIEWED BY

Julian Tejada,
Federal University of Sergipe, Brazil
Suhaib Abdurahman,
University of Southern California,
United States
Yinxian Zhang,
Queens College (CUNY), United States

Hannah L. Bunt1*, Alex Goddard1 , Tom W. Reader1 and
Alex Gillespie1,2
1
Department of Psychological and Behavioural Science, London School of Economics and Political
Science, London, United Kingdom, 2 Department of Psychology, Oslo New University College, Oslo,
Norway

*CORRESPONDENCE

Hannah L. Bunt
h.l.bunt@lse.ac.uk
RECEIVED 05 July 2024
ACCEPTED 27 January 2025
PUBLISHED 21 February 2025
CITATION

Bunt HL, Goddard A, Reader TW and
Gillespie A (2025) Validating the use of large
language models for psychological text
classiﬁcation. Front. Soc. Psychol. 3:1460277.
doi: 10.3389/frsps.2025.1460277
COPYRIGHT

© 2025 Bunt, Goddard, Reader and Gillespie.
This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is
permitted, provided the original author(s) and
the copyright owner(s) are credited and that
the original publication in this journal is cited,
in accordance with accepted academic
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction
is permitted which does not comply with
these terms.

Large language models (LLMs) are being used to classify texts into categories
informed by psychological theory (“psychological text classiﬁcation”). However,
the use of LLMs in psychological text classiﬁcation requires validation, and
it remains unclear exactly how psychologists should prompt and validate
LLMs for this purpose. To address this gap, we examined the potential of
using LLMs for psychological text classiﬁcation, focusing on ways to ensure
validity. We employed OpenAI’s GPT-4o to classify (1) reported speech in
online diaries, (2) other-initiations of conversational repair in Reddit dialogues,
and (3) harm reported in healthcare complaints submitted to NHS hospitals
and trusts. Employing a two-stage methodology, we developed and tested
the validity of the prompts used to instruct GPT-4o using manually labeled
data (N = 1,500 for each task). First, we iteratively developed three types
of prompts using one-third of each manually coded dataset, examining their
semantic validity, exploratory predictive validity, and content validity. Second,
we performed a conﬁrmatory predictive validity test on the ﬁnal prompts
using the remaining two-thirds of each dataset. Our ﬁndings contribute to the
literature by demonstrating that LLMs can serve as valid coders of psychological
phenomena in text, on the condition that researchers work with the LLM to
secure semantic, predictive, and content validity. They also demonstrate the
potential of using LLMs in rapid and cost-effective iterations over big qualitative
datasets, enabling psychologists to explore and iteratively reﬁne their concepts
and operationalizations during manual coding and classiﬁer development.
Accordingly, as a secondary contribution, we demonstrate that LLMs enable an
intellectual partnership with the researcher, deﬁned by a synergistic and recursive
text classiﬁcation process where the LLM’s generative nature facilitates validity
checks. We argue that using LLMs for psychological text classiﬁcation may signify
a paradigm shift toward a novel, iterative approach that may improve the validity
of psychological concepts and operationalizations.
KEYWORDS

large language models (LLMs), GPT, psychology, text classiﬁcation, validity, big
qualitative data, artiﬁcial intelligence

1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs)—such as ChatGPT, Gemini, and Claude—are
transforming research in psychology (Demszky et al., 2023; Pangakis et al., 2023; Ziems
et al., 2023). LLMs refer to neural networks that are trained on billions of textual
documents (Brown et al., 2020), and include both generative models (e.g., GPT) that
are designed to “predict the next word, phrase, sentence, or paragraph, given an input”

Frontiers in Social Psychology

01

frontiersin.org

Bunt et al.

10.3389/frsps.2025.1460277

(Demszky et al., 2023, p. 2), and non-generative models (e.g.,
BERT) that focus on understanding and encoding language
representations. In this paper, we focus on generative LLMs
(henceforth “LLMs”) due to their ability to classify text via natural
language prompts without additional training.
One of the most promising uses of LLMs is to classify texts
into meaningful categories informed by psychological theory (Bail,
2024); henceforth “psychological text classification.” They appear
to perform better than conventional approaches, such as word
counting or supervised machine learning (Brown et al., 2020;
Demszky et al., 2023; Van Atteveldt et al., 2021). This is highly
significant for psychological research, as LLMs can be used to
classify large textual datasets quickly and cost-effectively, whilst
requiring minimal programming skills to implement, thus opening
up big naturally occurring textual data to psychological analysis.
A body of evidence has accrued showing that LLMs can be used
to undertake simple text classification tasks. For example, LLMs
outperform crowd workers in the annotation of relevance, stance,
topics, and frames (Gilardi et al., 2023) as well as in annotating
political Twitter messages (Törnberg, 2023), and can identify and
label psychological constructs, such as sentiment, emotions, and
offensiveness across languages (Rathje et al., 2023). However, these
papers provide little systematic validation beyond performance
comparisons with hand-scored data. This is a problem because
using LLMs for psychological text classification requires validation,
as they can hallucinate and reproduce existing biases in the textual
data they were trained on (Demszky et al., 2023; Pangakis et al.,
2023). We draw on Krippendorff ’s (2004) validity framework,
adopting his definition of validity as “the quality of research results
that lead us to accept them as true, as speaking about the real world
of people, phenomena, events, experiences, and actions” (p. 313).
We also draw on Messick’s (1995) framework, which highlights the
utility of measures as integral to the validation process. There is
currently a lack of evidence and theorization guiding the validation
efforts in psychological text classification (De Kok, 2023) and little
attention has been paid as to why classification performance varies
across datasets and concepts. Specifically, it remains unclear exactly
how psychologists should prompt and validate the use of LLMs for
text classification.
To address this gap, we examined the validity of using LLMs
(GPT-4o) for the classification of three distinct psychological
phenomena: (1) reported speech in online diaries, (2) otherinitiations of repair in Reddit dialogues, and (3) harm reported in
healthcare complaints submitted to hospitals (N = 1,500 in each
dataset). These datasets were hand-scored using qualitative coding
protocols and interactions with GPT-4o using the chat interface.
We assessed the validity of using GPT-4o for psychological text
classification by developing and testing the validity of prompts that
instruct the model to complete a classification task.
We employed a two-stage methodology to develop and test
the validity of the prompts used to instruct GPT-4o. First,
we performed an iterative prompt development phase over the
development dataset (i.e., one-thirds of each manually coded
dataset). Here, we examined the semantic validity, exploratory
predictive validity, and content validity of our prompts. Second, we
assessed the confirmatory predictive validity of our final prompts
by assessing their performance on the withheld test dataset (i.e., the
remaining two-thirds of each dataset).

Frontiers in Social Psychology

We found that LLMs can be used for valid psychological
text classification, provided that researchers employ them in an
iterative and synergistic approach to establish validity. GPT-4o was
found to not only replicate human coding with high accuracy, but
also challenge us to refine our concepts and operationalizations.
Accordingly, our study provides a dual contribution. First, we
demonstrate that LLMs can provide valid coding of psychological
phenomena in text. Second, we show that LLMs enable an
intellectual partnership with researchers, allowing for validity
checks uniquely facilitated by their generative nature. We provide
avenues for future research and call for robust validation
frameworks to fully harness the potential of LLMs in psychological
text classification.

2 Literature review
Language contains meaningful cues about mental states and
behavior. Accordingly, psychology has a long history of drawing
insights from textual data. The field of psychological text analysis
has become increasingly empirical and systematic (Boyd and
Schwartz, 2021) since the early theories on language and mind
(e.g., Freud, 1914). In particular, the digitization of human
communications has led to the proliferation of textual data sources
(e.g., emails, recorded speech, and online dialogues) and advances
in natural language processing have created new ways to analyze
behavior and thoughts expressed through written or spoken
words. Whilst psychologists were previously limited to undertaking
manual qualitative analysis (e.g., content analysis) of small corpora
of textual data, they can now also use computer-aided approaches
to analyze vast amounts of textual data.
Recent advances in automated text analysis can benefit
psychological research (Birkenmaier et al., 2023; Boyd and
Schwartz, 2021; Jackson et al., 2022; Kennedy et al., 2021).
Psychology is grappling with the replication crisis, where many
psychological studies have failed to replicate. This has been
attributed to studies having low statistical power (Schimmack,
2012), as well as questionable research practices such as phacking, “salami slicing,” and selective reporting, compromising
the reliability of results (Open Science Collaboration, 2015;
Simmons et al., 2011). Yet, psychology’s replication crisis also stems
from a “validity crisis” (Schimmack, 2021; Yarkoni, 2022). The
validity of psychological research is often questioned due to its
reliance on survey and experimental methodologies, which can
oversimplify complex human experiences and fail to mimic realworld conditions, thereby compromising the ability to generalize
to circumstances beyond the lab (Holleman et al., 2020; Kjell et al.,
2019; Rai and Fiske, 2010).
Qualitative approaches, often presented as a counterpoint
to quantitative approaches, also have limitations (Chang et al.,
2021; Seawright, 2016). Qualitative data are typically collected
by engaging participants (e.g., interviews), which can result in
potentially socially desirable responses with low ecological validity.
They may also be drawn from small samples of participants with
limited generalizability. Additionally, inconsistent manual coding
can compromise reliability (Lee et al., 2020). Biases and cherrypicking can also undermine reliability, and skew findings (Morse,
2010). Finally, the time- and cost-intensiveness of manual analyses

02

frontiersin.org

Bunt et al.

10.3389/frsps.2025.1460277

can pose feasibility issues, especially when resources are limited
(Belotto, 2018).
Using computers to analyze text enables researchers to analyze
high-validity textual data (e.g., everyday discourse) in a transparent
way at scale. Moreover, because textual data can be analyzed
both qualitatively and quantitatively, researchers can leverage a
mixed-methods approach to have the best of both worlds: using
algorithmic text classifiers to create replicable and valid measures
of psychological phenomena, while qualitatively interpreting the
specific meaning and context within which the text is produced
to probe validity and generate explanations. Thus, the advent of
new and large textual data sources, and development of automated
methods for classifying them, has the potential to address both
replication and validity problems in psychological research (Chang
et al., 2021; Gillespie et al., 2024; Jackson et al., 2022; Kjell et al.,
2019).
The simplest text classifiers involve “pattern-matching,” where
textual data is examined for the presence and extent of specific
words or phrases associated with psychological states. For example,
the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) software, built in
the 1990s and still widely used, counts word frequencies to classify
textual data (see e.g., Tausczik and Pennebaker, 2010). Researchers
have also developed supervised and unsupervised machine learning
approaches to classifying text: the former involves algorithms being
trained to reproduce top-down manual coding of text data, and
the latter identifies psychological phenomena through bottomup clustering of texts. Both of these approaches offer enhanced
performance in data processing and analysis available to those
with more advanced programming skills (Boyd and Schwartz, 2021;
Jackson et al., 2022).
The validity of automated text classification approaches hinges
on “gold standard” data, usually based on human coding. Gold
standard datasets are used as benchmarks to evaluate the accuracy
of automated text classifiers, yet the quality of these gold standard
datasets is sensitive to factors such as bias in coding, poor training,
low inter-rater agreement, or poor-quality coding due to fatigue
and limits to attention span (Demszky et al., 2023; Grimmer and
Stewart, 2013; Grimmer et al., 2022; Song et al., 2020). Alternatively,
even when there is high inter-rater reliability, the conceptualization
or operationalization of the target construct may still be flawed
or of low quality. This means that coders might consistently
apply the same misconceptions or biases about a psychological
construct, leading to reliable but invalid coding. Accordingly, the
validity of our concepts and measurement protocols is paramount
(Bringmann et al., 2022; Flake et al., 2022; Flake and Fried, 2020).
The challenges associated with existing text classification highlights
the need for innovative approaches to address validity problems.

command) that guides an LLM toward generating desired output
(Törnberg, 2024).
LLMs have been used in various types of psychological text
classification: for example, using OpenAI’s GPT to annotate tweets
and news articles (Gilardi et al., 2023), identify violent speech
(Matter et al., 2024), classify utterances (e.g., in terms of emotion)
in conversations and media (Ziems et al., 2023), and replicate
annotations of datasets used in published research (Pangakis et al.,
2023). While LLM classifier performance varies across datasets and
concepts in these studies, it is currently unclear why. For example,
in tests using GPT-4 by Pangakis et al. (2023), F1-scores ranged
from 0.059 to 0.969, although it is unspecified which domains these
scores apply to. These studies note that LLMs show promise for
psychological text classification due to their scalability, ease of use,
and time- and cost-effectiveness, however they do not adequately
discuss how to develop and test their validity in applied use.
LLMs have potential advantages over non-generative
automated text classification methods. LLMs can be instructed
using natural language, are relatively accessible, can produce
rationales for their classification, and do not require training data
in order to work (De Kok, 2023; Demszky et al., 2023; Rathje et al.,
2023; Törnberg, 2024). This is unlike dictionary-based methods
such as LIWC, which are highly accessible and interpretable, but
do not capture context-specific meanings or nuances in language
and fail to precisely grasp complex linguistic structures (Boyd
and Schwartz, 2021). It is also unlike traditional machine learning
techniques that cannot be instructed using natural language,
require significant training data, and cannot be prompted for their
rationale (Grimmer and Stewart, 2013; Kennedy et al., 2021). In
contrast, LLMs can be used as “zero-shot” classifiers, meaning they
can be used as classifiers without requiring training. Moreover,
LLMs may provide a reliable way to classify textual data, for
example in terms of consistency of results (Pangakis et al., 2023;
Reiss, 2023), and may help with various aspects of social research
including ideation, writing, and programming (Bail, 2024; Korinek,
2023).
In summary, psychological text classification using LLMs
offers potential benefits over both manual and non-generative
automated text classification methods. However, the full potential
of LLMs in this field remains undefined, and there is a lack
of established validation approaches. We investigate this in the
current study.

3 The current research
Our overarching aim is to explore the potential of LLMs
to validly classify psychological phenomena in text. We assume
that the validity of LLM-based psychological text classification
has to be established outside of the LLMs themselves. Where the
reliability partly lies in the hands of LLM developers—because
the quality and architecture of the model affect the consistency
and reproducibility of the LLM (Törnberg, 2024)—the researcher
remains solely responsible for validity. We use GPT-4o, an LLM
developed by OpenAI, because our pilot testing found it to be
the best-performing LLM available. We employed only prompts to
instruct the model, as further training or fine-tuning of the model
was beyond the scope of our study. Our aim is divided into two
sub-aims that run parallel to our two-stage methodology.

2.1 Using large language models for
psychological text classiﬁcation
Since the launch of ChatGPT in 2022, researchers have
increasingly considered how modern LLMs might enhance
the classification of psychological phenomena in text (Bail,
2024). Practically, developing a text classifier using LLMs
involves “prompt development” or “prompt engineering” whereby
researchers iteratively refine a prompt (i.e., a human-language
Frontiers in Social Psychology

03

frontiersin.org

Bunt et al.

10.3389/frsps.2025.1460277

3.1 Aim 1: to develop high-validity LLM
prompts for psychological text
classiﬁcation

this through a confirmatory predictive validity test, using the same
quantitative evaluation metrics as in the exploratory predictive
validity test. Through this final validity test, we tested whether the
validity of the prompts developed using the development dataset
held on unseen data.

Our first aim was addressed in an exploratory prompt
development phase that used one-third of each manually coded
gold standard dataset (i.e., the development dataset). Drawing
on Krippendorff ’s (2004) validity framework, we operationalized
validity during prompt development into three types: semantic
validity, exploratory predictive validity, and content validity.
Krippendorff ’s definitions of these validity types were adopted
with minor modifications to suit the current context. We defined
semantic validity as qualitative evidence that the meaning of
language used in the measurement protocol (i.e., the prompt)
corresponds to the meaning of the intended phenomenon in the
target data. For instance, prompts with low semantic validity might
include ambiguous language or specialized jargon that leads to
misunderstandings, while prompts with high semantic validity
use unambiguous terminology and parsimonious definitions that
effectively guide the model toward the desired response. We
therefore sought to develop prompts that elicited the intended
concept “understanding” in the LLM and, thus, were consistent
in meaning with the psychological phenomenon being classified.
Overall, evidence of semantic validity is assessed holistically and
iteratively, based on whether the prompt meets its intended goals.
Next, we defined exploratory predictive validity as quantitative
evidence on the extent to which a prompt accurately predicts
outcomes in the prompt development phase. This was obtained
by calculating relevant quantitative evaluation metrics using
the manually coded gold standard dataset as the criterion.
Finally, content validity—defined as the degree to which the
classifier captures all the relevant aspects of the construct—was
assessed by qualitatively examining the types of errors the LLM
made compared to the gold standard dataset, and reflecting on
whether the LLM accurately captured the different aspects of the
target construct.

4 Methodology
This section outlines the methodology we used to explore the
potential of LLMs to validly classify psychological phenomena in
text. Figure 1 illustrates our approach: we developed a manual
coding framework through pilot studies, manually coded the
datasets (except for the harm dataset, which was already coded—
see Gillespie and Reader, 2016), split them into development
and test datasets, iteratively refined the LLM prompts using the
development dataset, and assessed the final prompts’ performance
on the test dataset.

4.1 Data collection and manual coding
We operationalized three classification tasks, each based on a
different type of textual data. Our data were chosen to reflect Ziems
et al.’s (2023) distinction of textual data types into “utterances,”
“conversations,” and “documents”—each having different analytical
affordances. Specifically, we performed (1) span extraction and
binary classification of reported speech in online diary utterances,
(2) binary classification of other-initiations of conversational repair
in Reddit conversations, and (3) reasoning and subsequent ordinal
classification of harm due to treatment errors reported in healthcare
complaint documents submitted to hospitals. In what follows, we
explain the sampling and manual coding of the data (see Table 1 for
more details).

4.1.1 Reported speech in personal documents
Reported speech refers to any communication (including
written) that purportedly represents another speech event,
regardless of its veracity (Lucy, 1993). People refer to the utterances
of others in live speech (e.g., “then they said X”), in social media
posts (e.g., referencing a previous post), in formal communications
(e.g., quoting a source in a newspaper) and in diaries (e.g.,
reporting a social interaction). Reported speech has long been of
interest to literary scholars (Bakhtin, 1984) and psychologists (Holt,

3.2 Aim 2: to test the validity of the ﬁnal
LLM prompts
Our second aim was to assess whether our developed prompts
successfully completed the text classification task on a held-out
portion of the gold standard dataset (i.e., the test dataset). We did
TABLE 1 Summary of dataset characteristics.

Dataset

Type

Source

Documents
(N = 4,500)

Reported
speech

Utterance

Online diaries (n = 10)

Random sample of
paragraphs (n = 1,500)

150

Agreement = 0.86
Krippendorff ’s a = 0.66

Otherinitiations of
repair

Conversation

Reddit dialogues
(n = 387) sampled from
27 subreddits

Reddit posts and
comments (n = 1,500)

981

Agreement = 0.95
Krippendorff ’s a = 0.81

Harm

Document

Healthcare complaints
submitted to NHS
hospitals
(n = 1,500)

Healthcare complaints
processed with OCR
(n = 1,500)

125

Intraclass Correlation
Coefficient (ICC) = 0.86

Frontiers in Social Psychology

04

Inter-rater reliability
sample size (N
coders = 2)

Inter-rater reliability

frontiersin.org

Bunt et al.

10.3389/frsps.2025.1460277

FIGURE 1

Overall methodology of LLM classiﬁer development used across the three datasets. Rectangles indicate a process, parallelograms indicate a decision,
and wave rectangles indicate documents. Gray objects indicate input and output. Solid lines indicate the progression through the methodology,
while hashed arrows indicate regression or revisions of earlier steps.

2000) because it is revealing of a deep sociality in stories and in
human speech. It has also been studied as a window on internal
dialogues, perhaps revealing a fundamental dialogical dimension to
the human mind (Aveling et al., 2015; Linell, 2009; Marková, 2016).
To ensure that diverse writing styles were represented, ten large
(10+ year) diaries were sampled. The diaries were written digitally
via an online platform and all diarists gave consent and provided

Frontiers in Social Psychology

access to their diaries. Single paragraphs in diary entries were used
as the semantic unit for reported speech classification, as reported
speech may span multiple sentences. Paragraphs were sampled to
contain a minimum of 50 characters and a maximum of 200 words.
The final dataset contained 1,500 paragraphs.
The diary excerpts were subsequently coded for reported speech
by the first author upon deliberation with the team as well

05

frontiersin.org

Bunt et al.

10.3389/frsps.2025.1460277

as GPT (see Supplementary material for the codebook, adapted
from a codebook developed by a team of five MSc level coders).
This entailed extracting spans of reported speech, containing the
reporting clause and reported clause. The last author coded 10%,
i.e., 150 units of the dataset. The coding of reported speech showed
good inter-rater reliability (agreement = 0.86; Krippendorff ’s α
= 0.66).

to NHS hospitals and trusts. Harm is defined as “the overall harm
caused to patients by the problems raised in the letter of complaint”
(Gillespie and Reader, 2016, p. 13). The Healthcare Complaint
Analysis Tool (HCAT) includes an assessment of harm with the
aim to reveal hot spots and blind spots in the quality and safety of
healthcare. HCAT adopts the UK National Reporting and Learning
System’s risk matrix to assess harm (Gillespie and Reader, 2016,
2018).
We used healthcare complaints collected and analyzed in the
development and validation of HCAT (Gillespie and Reader, 2016).
Healthcare complaints provide insights from patients into hospital
care where harm and near misses occur during the care journey. As
such, they are important to systematically analyze to give insights
into the quality and safety of healthcare and point to tangible
areas of improvement. Freedom of Information requests were
used to obtain access to healthcare complaints from 56 randomly
sampled NHS hospitals and trusts. Two trained coders (MSc level
graduates who received five hours of training) coded complaints
using the HCAT manual (see Supplementary material), including
harm, the latter of which showed excellent inter-rater reliability
(ICC = 0.86).
Any personally identifiable information within the complaints
was manually redacted by hospital staff before being shared in PDF
format. As a result, the text from the PDFs had to be extracted. For
this purpose, Google Cloud Vision’s optical character recognition
(OCR) was applied to 2,235 healthcare complaints. This yielded
somewhat noisy textual data, with incomplete sentences due to
redaction or filled with non-alphanumeric characters. However,
we used ChatGPT to query its understanding of the text,
which we deemed sufficient for an LLM-based psychological text
classification. The 1,500 complaints with the least redactions were
used for the analysis.

4.1.2 Other-initiations of conversational repair in
online dialogues
Conversational repairs are defined as sequences of
dialogue aimed at resolving problems of misunderstanding
or miscommunication (Dingemanse and Enfield, 2015).
Identical language can be used in various ways, leading to
misunderstandings and necessitating constant maintenance
through “conversational repair” (Healey et al., 2018; Reddy and
Ortony, 1979; Schegloff et al., 1977). Conversational repairs
appear to be a universal feature of dialogue, where evidence
suggests clarification requests occur on average every 1.4 min
(Dingemanse and Enfield, 2015). However, conversational repairs
have been understudied in computer-mediated communication
(Meredith, 2020; Meredith et al., 2021), despite their importance
to high-quality online dialogues (Goddard and Gillespie, 2023).
In this study, we identify other-initiations of conversational
repairs using clarification requests (Dingemanse and Enfield,
2015).
Repairs occur in face-to-face dialogue between participants
in a linear sequence (Schegloff et al., 1977). Online comment
threads have an equivalent organization, where participants can
directly reply to each other. We sampled from Reddit, an online
forum and community platform organized into micro-blogs called
subreddits, each with their own rules and norms (Chandrasekharan
et al., 2018). Using Reddit’s application programming interface
(API), data was sampled in November 2021 from 27 subreddits,
chosen to provide a spread of topics (e.g., r/movies, r/science,
and r/coronavirus) and the media focus of the subreddit (e.g.,
r/pics requires posting a picture, and r/jokes a text-based
joke). The dataset was built by first randomly sampling each
subreddit’s recent posts, then collecting all the comments and
parent posts.
Two independent coders scored the Reddit posts and
comments for the presence of other-initiations of repair
(Krippendorff ’s α = 0.81). An existing coding scheme for
identifying other-initiations of repair (Dingemanse and Enfield,
2015) was adapted for online contexts, and the two coders
performed eight pilot rounds (following Figure 1) prior to scoring
the complete dataset (N adjacency pairs = 1,500) sampled from
387 Reddit threads. An adjacency pair is a mutually dependent
set of dialogue turns (Sacks et al., 1974). Here, this included an
utterance from one participant (denoted as Speaker A) with a
response from another participant (denoted as Speaker B).

4.2 Splitting up the gold standard dataset
We used GPT-4o (specifically, gpt-4o-2024-05-13) in a zeroshot setting using prompt development, meaning that we did not
perform additional training or fine-tuning for our classification
tasks. In our Python pipeline, the LLM iterated over single units
of analysis, thus denying the model any knowledge of prior inputs
or outputs (i.e., each instance of coding was unaffected by the other
instances). While reasonable insight can be gained from working
with a small sample of a dataset (e.g., between 25 and 50 units
of analysis), prompt development may involve many iterations
over a dataset before a final prompt that completes a designated
task with high accuracy is established. However, this poses a risk
of overfitting, where the developed prompts do not generalize to
unseen data.
Accordingly, we split each manually coded (gold standard)
dataset into two datasets prior to prompt development. These
datasets are akin to the “training” and “validation” datasets
used in the development of supervised machine learning models
(e.g., Song et al., 2020). In supervised machine learning, the
training dataset is used to develop an algorithmic model,
which is subsequently evaluated on the test dataset to avoid
overfitting or underfitting the model to one’s data. In the

4.1.3 Severity of harm reported in patient
complaints about poor healthcare experiences
Our final concept of interest is harm caused by medical errors
(i.e., safety incidents), as described in letters of complaint submitted

Frontiers in Social Psychology

06

frontiersin.org

Bunt et al.

10.3389/frsps.2025.1460277

present case using LLMs, we used the training dataset for
iterative and exploratory prompt development, while we used
the test dataset for confirmatory predictive validity testing. The
separation between exploratory and confirmatory stages enables
scientific rigor, as the former stage facilitates inference to the
best measurement protocol (informed by the data’s affordances
and the prompt development outcomes), and the latter stage
increases confidence in the overall validity of our approach by
testing the prompts on unseen data (see Rubin and Donkin,
2022).
For the current purposes, we term the subsets of a manually
coded dataset the “development” and “test” datasets. The ability
to conduct prompt development with relatively little data and
the importance of validation point to the need for the dataset
split sizes be weighted toward validation. Therefore, we split our
manually coded datasets into development and test sets of 500 and
1,000 units of analysis respectively. The reported speech and otherinitiations of repair datasets were stratified, meaning the proportion
of reported speech coded for in diary excerpts and other-initiations
of repair in Reddit dialogues were equal in both sets (24% and
8% respectively). Similarly, the harm dataset was split such that
the proportion of classifications on the ordinal scale was similarly
distributed in both datasets.

language such that the model is perceived to correctly capture the
meaning of the intended concept. Because every iteration over the
data yields immediate feedback on whether the prompt achieves
this goal, a relatively small subset of the development dataset
(i.e., between 25–50 rows) can be used to ascertain evidence of
semantic validity.

4.3.2 Exploratory predictive validity
Next, we calculated evaluation metrics on the development
dataset to provide preliminary quantitative insight into the LLM’s
ability to accurately mirror human coding behaviors, thereby
assessing exploratory predictive validity. The choice of evaluation
metric was determined by the data type and annotation task.
For reported speech, we integrated a fuzzy matching function to
gauge whether the human coder and GPT extracted similar spans
of reported speech. For ease of comparison, however, the final
evaluation metrics used a binary variable representing whether
both the human and GPT coded for reported speech in a diary
paragraph. A confusion matrix was produced to assess the accuracy,
precision, recall, and F1-scores between the model and human
coding. Precision refers to the ratio of positive predictions that
are correct, while recall measures the ratio of actual positive cases
identified correctly. The F1-score is a harmonic mean of precision
and recall, offering a single balanced measure. The same evaluation
metrics were applied to compare the presence of other-initiations
of repair (binary) in human coding and LLM coding. For the harm
classifications, we report agreement and a weighted kappa, the
latter of which is a measure of the agreement between predictions
and actual values, considering both the quantity and the severity
of disagreements, making it useful for ordinal classifications (De
Raadt et al., 2021).
Aiming for the highest F1-score or weighted kappa possible,
we kept track of the evaluation metrics throughout prompt
development to identify whether a prompt required further
iteration. Generally, we took low scores to indicate that a prompt
achieved inaccurate classification results compared to the human
coding, spurring further iterations over the prompts. We took
high scores to indicate accurate classification results compared
to the human coding, providing us reasons to assume that the
prompt’s performance was sufficient. Moreover, in the case of
binary classification, we used the precision and recall of the target
variable to steer the edits to the prompt. Low precision indicates a
high number of false positives and low recall a high number of false
negatives. We therefore assumed the former meant the prompt was
too broad in its scope and definition, resulting in us making it more
specific (e.g., more detail in definition). In contrast, we assumed the
latter meant the prompt was too specific, resulting in a broadening
of its scope (e.g., removal of detail in definition). This process was
repeated until we achieved a balance between precision and recall,
whilst seeking to maximize them.

4.3 Stage 1: iteratively developing the
validity of LLM prompts
The first stage of our methodology involved iterative prompt
development using the development dataset. Prompts are humanlanguage instructions for the LLM, written to guide the model
in generating responses by framing the task and specifying the
expected output format, if applicable. Prompt development is a
highly iterative process where one explores how to verbally instruct
the LLM to complete a certain task. Here, the initial prompts drew
on codebooks used for manual psychological text classification.
In the process of prompt development, we iteratively refined
prompts with the aim to establish three types of validity: semantic
validity, exploratory predictive validity, and content validity. We
assumed that a prompt could only be considered valid with
sufficient evidence of these three types of validity. Key to prompt
development is the recursive refinement of the terminology used
and instructions given to the LLM based on pushback from the
model. For example, we altered the language of the terminology
beyond what was in the original codebooks to elicit perceived
correct “understanding” in the LLM. The manually coded data
itself stayed the same throughout. Any revisions to the terminology
and/or prompt were concluded in the prompt development phase
before confirming the validity on the test dataset.

4.3.1 Semantic validity
4.3.3 Content validity

Prompt development is an important time to explore one’s
language use, specifically through qualitatively assessing whether
the terminology and definitions in the prompt elicit the intended
concept “understanding” in the model. In other words, we assessed
the semantic validity of our prompts, iteratively refining our

Frontiers in Social Psychology

We gathered evidence of content validity through a systematic
and qualitative analysis of the LLM’s classifications of the full
development dataset. For the binary classifiers (reported speech
and other-initiations of repair), this included a manual inspection

07

frontiersin.org

Bunt et al.

10.3389/frsps.2025.1460277

prompting, Wei et al., 2022). In doing so, we explored variants of
“zero-shot” and “few-shot” prompts (e.g., Patil et al., 2024).
Our prompts (defined in the user role) take the following
structure: (1) concept definitions with either “minimal” or
“maximal” expansion of detail, and (2) zero or a few examples
of the concept of interest. This yielded a two-by-two framework
with four possible types of prompts: MinZero (a prompt with
minimal concept definition and zero examples), MinFew (a prompt
with minimal concept definition and a few examples), MaxZero
(a prompt with maximal concept definition and zero examples),
and MaxFew (a prompt with maximal concept definition and a few
examples). We excluded MinFew from our prompting framework
to maintain a linear progression in prompt complexity (as arguably,
a MinFew prompt is more complex and comprehensive than a
MaxZero prompt). Doing so enabled a clear and parsimonious
comparison across prompt types. Examples of reported speech
and other-initiations of repair were included at the discretion of
the individual prompt developers, guided by their assessment of
representativeness and conceptual alignment. Examples of every
level of harm were directly taken from the NPSA (2008) risk matrix.
All prompts contained step-by-step instructions with specific
directives guiding the model’s tasks or prescribed output formats
(e.g., “Respond with ‘YES’ if . . . ”). We also provided additional
structure to our prompts by using headings to succinctly delineate
sections (e.g., “Definition: . . . ,” “Instructions: . . . ”). These task
instructions were consistent for each prompt per classification task.
Beyond verbal instructions, one can set additional parameters
when working with an LLM’s API (Demszky et al., 2023). For
example, the LLM’s “temperature” is a key parameter that controls
the randomness of the model’s output (OpenAI, 2024). A lower
temperature results in more deterministic output, while a higher
temperature leads to more diverse and unpredictable output.
We set the temperature to 0 to maximize the reliability of the
LLM responses.

of the LLM’s false positives (where the model incorrectly classifies
instances of the target phenomenon) and false negatives (where
the model fails to identify correct instances). For the ordinal
classifier (harm classification task), we evaluated the skewness
of discrepancies, and whether the LLM rated structurally higher,
lower, or in similar distributions compared to the human coder.
Edge cases (instances where the accuracy of classification is
ambiguous) were also identified, as they could reveal tensions
between the human and the LLM regarding the interpretation and
application of criteria for classification. Finally, we aimed to identify
any potential biases in both human and LLM coding.
The aim of the content validity checks was to understand
the nature of discrepancies between human coding and LLM
coding. If disagreements in coding pointed to structural issues
that were deemed necessary to rectify, we conducted further
iterations over the prompt until satisfactory results were reached
or the LLM’s performance had plateaued (as indicated by the
quantitative evaluation metrics). If not, this step was the final one to
undertake on the development dataset, closing the iterative prompt
development loop.

4.4 Stage 2: testing the validity of the ﬁnal
LLM prompts
With the final prompts developed, we moved onto the second
stage of the methodology. This entailed running the prompts on the
test dataset, which the LLM had not “seen” before. This stage served
to evaluate the generalizability and effectiveness of the prompts
on new data, ensuring that the prompt had generalized beyond
the development dataset. Again, we calculated evaluation metrics
to gauge the LLM’s performance and provide an understanding of
agreement or correlation between the LLM’s and human coders’
classifications on the test dataset. The obtained results were used
as the final indicators of the LLM’s performance in performing a
certain text classification task as compared to the human coding.

5 Results
We present and analyze our findings based on the two-stage
methodology that we developed to explore the potential of GPT4o to validly classify psychological phenomena in text. The first
stage aimed to develop valid prompts using the development
dataset; the second stage aimed to test the validity of the
final prompts on the test dataset. We address qualitative and
quantitative insights gained as part of our prompt development
and discuss implications for using GPT-4o in psychological
text classification.

4.5 Prompt design
OpenAI’s API offers the possibility to assign the LLM roles,
where the “user” role defines the prompt, the “system” role defines
high-level instructions, and the “assistant” role provides an example
of the model’s response. We opted to make use of this functionality,
and provided GPT-4o with a designated persona defined in the
system role, priming its role as a research assistant in the relevant
classification task. This approach, which we implemented as an
exploratory measure, aligns with OpenAI’s best practices for
prompting (OpenAI, 2023). We did not systematically compare its
performance against prompts without a defined system role.
Due to the scarcity of peer-reviewed research on prompt
engineering for our specific tasks when we began our study, we
relied on OpenAI’s (2023) best practices to guide our prompt
development. We opted for prompts that were simple by design
and applicable across domains rather than exhaustive in covering
additional dimensions to our prompts (e.g., chain-of-thought

Frontiers in Social Psychology

5.1 Aim 1: to develop high-validity LLM
prompts for psychological text
classiﬁcation
5.1.1 Semantic validity
Semantic validity was developed over many iterations of
prompt development. During this process, we aimed to identify
what language-use (related to the psychological phenomenon as

08

frontiersin.org

Bunt et al.

10.3389/frsps.2025.1460277

TABLE 2 Exploratory predictive validity test results.

well as task instructions) would elicit the intended “understanding”
in GPT. We found that conversing with and interpreting
output from the LLM proved crucial to this end. In our
use cases, this collaborative process resulted in us tweaking
coding frameworks and revising the language in our prompts
to aid classification performance (e.g., abandoning academicallypreferred terminology). We describe the development of semantic
validity for each classification task in detail below, and provide the
final prompts in the Supplementary material.
First, during the development of the manual coding framework,
we found that GPT coded performative verbs (e.g., to invite,
to promise, to apologize) as reported speech, whereas these
were initially not included in the manual codebook due to
oversight. Upon deliberation with the team, it was decided
that performative verbs should have been included in the
definition of reported speech. This led to a minor change to the
manual codebook and another iteration of manual coding. An
example of a performative verb, presented as reported speech,
was later also added to the examples included in the MaxFew
prompt. Moreover, when developing the prompts for reported
speech classification, we discovered that GPT’s “understanding” of
reported speech was in close alignment to our own. Elaboration or
redefinition of reported speech in fact reduced performance. We
therefore did not add our own definition of reported speech to
the prompts.
Second, we abandoned the initial term “other-initiations of
repair” for our prompts. Due to the unsatisfactory performance
of early prompts, we used ChatGPT to generate definitions
of clarification requests based on unlabelled raw data, create
permutations of a previous prompt, explain edge cases, and explain
its own misclassifications. The manually coded data was unaltered
during this process. Through the interaction with ChatGPT, we
identified that the term “clarification requests” improved the
model’s performance compared to the more academic and specific
term “other-initiations of repair.” Repairs require researchers
to pay close attention to what participants are doing in the
text itself (Schegloff, 2007) and it may be that “clarification
requests” prompts GPT to infer based on structural features
of the text (i.e., a type of question) rather than a subjective
explanation of the dialogue. The change in terminology caused
GPT’s performance to increase (from F1 = 0.61 to F1 =
0.77), demonstrating the importance of semantic validity in
enhancing the tool’s performance in detecting other-initiations
of repair.
Third, we completed many iterations over the prompts to
instruct GPT to ordinally scale an assessment of harm for the
hospital complaints. During this process, we concluded that both
our data quality and complexity of the task were negatively affecting
GPT’s classification performance. We improved performance by
including a data cleaning prompt in our script, asking GPT to fill
in the gaps of our raw data (Google Cloud Vision OCR output)
with the most appropriate named entity placeholder and clean the
text such that it became more legible. We manually verified that
the meaning of the original complaints was preserved. Despite
the prompt increasing in performance, we noted that GPT still
had difficulty with the harm terminology originally used the
Healthcare Complaints Analysis Tool (see Gillespie and Reader,

Frontiers in Social Psychology

Dataset

Prompt
type

Exploratory
predictive validity

Reported speech

MinZero

Precision = 0.95
Recall = 0.59
F1-score = 0.90

MaxZero

Precision = 0.90
Recall = 0.64
F1-score = 0.91

MaxFew

Precision = 0.93
Recall = 0.67
F1-score = 0.92

MinZero

Precision = 0.67
Recall = 0.86
F1-score = 0.89

MaxZero

Precision = 0.67
Recall = 0.80
F1-score = 0.89

MaxFew

Precision = 0.86
Recall = 0.70
F1-score = 0.91

MinZero

Agreement = 0.34
Weighted k = 0.52

MaxZero

Agreement = 0.34
Weighted k = 0.51

MaxFew

Agreement = 0.33
Weighted k = 0.47

Other-initiations of repair

Harm

2016). It struggled to distinguish harm caused by healthcare staff ’s
negligence or accidents from the harmful effects of the condition
that led a patient to hospital admission. Also, we observed that GPT
tended to apply harm as an overall rating of a healthcare experience
(e.g., to describe the outcome of a series of small cumulative errors),
and these may have been challenging for GPT to recognize and
grade. We experimented with different language in our prompts,
leading us to abandon the harm terminology and instead ask the
model to assess the severity of healthcare incidents, highlighting
the causal attribution implicated in the conceptualization
of harm.

5.1.2 Exploratory predictive validity
At the end of the prompt development process for all three text
classification tasks, we ran our evaluation metrics over the complete
development datasets (n = 500). For reported speech and otherinitiations of repair, we list the performance of different prompts
in terms of the precision and recall of positive cases, as well as the
weighted F1-score. We report the results in Table 2.

5.1.3 Content validity
Finally, we conducted qualitative content validity checks to
assess the effectiveness of our prompts in executing the intended
text classification task and covering all relevant aspects of the
intended construct. This was done through a manual inspection
of discrepancies between human and LLM coding. For our

09

frontiersin.org

Bunt et al.

10.3389/frsps.2025.1460277

TABLE 3 Content validity test results of best-performing prompts per dataset.

Dataset

Content validity checks for best-performing prompt

Reported speech

Discrepancies between human coding and GPT coding:
Edge cases: it is unclear whether the human coder or GPT was correct.
False positives: missed cases of reported speech by the human coder; mistakes by GPT where the extracted sentence does not
contain reported speech; instances where GPT codes what was “not” said (e.g., “I’m not going to say X”), which was excluded as
reported speech in the codebook for human coders.
False negatives: missed cases of reported speech by GPT, some missed cases are more obvious than others.

Other-initiations of repair

Discrepancies between human coding and GPT coding:
Edge cases: it is unclear whether the human coder or GPT was correct.
False positives: cases coded by GPT where Speaker A asks for clarification, not Speaker B, cases where corrections are coded as
clarification request, and cases where clarification requests are put in a sentence form, not question.
False negatives: missed cases of clarification requests by GPT; rhetorical questions were missed as cases of clarification requests.

Harm

Discrepancies between human coding and GPT coding:
Regular overestimation of harm by GPT compared to the human coding.
Mentions of adverse events (whether these occurred as a result of healthcare incidents or not) led to high harm ratings, even when
these were not due to healthcare incidents.
GPT barely codes for “no harm,” whereas human coders regularly did so. GPT appears to struggle with recognizing that no harm
was done in hospital.

reported speech and other-initiations of repair classifications, these
discrepancies concerned false positives, false negatives, and edge
cases. For our harm classification, these discrepancies revolved
around the numerical difference or “discrepancy value” between
the harm category as assigned by humans and GPT, as well as a
qualitative interpretation of the reasoning behind GPT’s coding.
We discuss some patterns we have inferred from working with GPT
on all three datasets. We report on dataset-specific observations
in Table 3.
First, in instances of binary classification (i.e., indicating
whether an instance of the construct of interest is present), both
human coders and the LLM occasionally overlook an instance
of the construct. While human oversight can stem from limited
attention span or coder fatigue, the LLM might miss instances
due to the task’s complexity or characteristics of its original
training data. In any case, we found it beneficial to inspect the
LLM’s false negatives to assess how often the concept of interest
was overlooked and determine whether this has implications for
the coding framework or coding process (for example because
of different construct understandings among human and LLM).
In inspecting the LLM’s false negatives, we learned that it is
implied that one might be looking at a human false positive in
the gold standard data set, for instance, classifying something as
reported speech where, in hindsight, this should not have been
the case. Similarly, the LLM’s false positives sometimes concerned
misclassifications which either followed from a failure to follow our
instructions, or where it classified a positive instance of a concept
where, upon reflection, we considered this false. The content
validity checks therefore provided an opportunity to reflect on our
gold standard dataset. Considering the overall performance of the
LLM classifier, however, we consider the extent of misclassifications
in both the reported speech and other-initiations of repair datasets
to be minor.
Second, upon inspection of the discrepancies between human
coding and LLM coding in all datasets, we found that a
number of GPT’s “misclassifications” concerned edge cases. These
are instances that sit on the boundary of definitions and

Frontiers in Social Psychology

challenge the classification norms. A paraphrased example of
a reported speech edge case from our dataset is, “my friend
thinks the concert is going to be sold out,” which presents
ambiguity as, without context, it could be interpreted as either
a direct quote or a summary of the friend’s thoughts, only the
first of which would be considered reported speech according
to our coding framework. Inevitably, edge cases will present
themselves in psychological text classification, and we found
that GPT helped in recognizing and highlighting some of
these instances.
Third, we encountered situations where GPT, despite explicit
instructions, did not adhere to our desired output structure,
revealing a potential divergence in understanding between humans
and LLMs. For example, we instructed GPT to code rhetorical
questions as a type of clarification request, yet it consistently
ignored this instruction, resulting in false negatives. Similarly,
we found GPT to consistently overestimate harm in our dataset
of healthcare complaints, often seemingly based on the severity
of the medical situation (e.g., death; patients experiencing the
consequences of grave health conditions) rather than harm caused
by healthcare staff ’s negligence or accidents. This suggests that
LLMs may struggle when imposed definitions or constructs are
not aligned with its semantic network, or if events have a high
degree of nuance (e.g., complaint about the manner of a death,
rather than the death itself) or relate to a series of incidents that
are told in a non-linear fashion recognizable to human coders, but
not necessarily GPT (e.g., complaints that list a series of mistakes
or encounters that are sequenced over a year-long timeline). Our
experiences underscore the importance of conceptual clarity when
classifying psychological phenomena in text. However, this does not
imply that human understanding is flawed or needs adaptation if
discrepancies arise. Instead, these discrepancies could be due to the
unique semantic network of the LLMs and their training processes
and biases (De Kok, 2023). Thus, it is crucial to consider the LLM’s
unique semantic network when designing prompts and reflect
on the structural discrepancies that may affect the classifications’
content validity.

10

frontiersin.org

Bunt et al.

10.3389/frsps.2025.1460277

TABLE 4 Conﬁrmatory predictive validity results.

5.2.2 Other-initiations of repair

Dataset

Prompt type

Conﬁrmatory
predictive
validity

Reported speech

MinZero

Precision = 0.88
Recall = 0.65
F1-score = 0.89

MaxZero

Precision = 0.82
Recall = 0.74
F1-score = 0.90

MaxFew

Precision = 0.85
Recall = 0.77
F1-score = 0.91

MinZero

Precision = 0.72
Recall = 0.84
F1-score = 0.91

MaxZero

Precision = 0.68
Recall = 0.78
F1-score = 0.89

MaxFew

Precision = 0.91
Recall = 0.64
F1-score = 0.91

MinZero

Agreement = 0.34
Weighted k = 0.57

MaxZero

Agreement = 0.34
Weighted k = 0.51

MaxFew

Agreement = 0.33
Weighted k = 0.49

Other-initiations of repair

Harm

Turning to the classification of other-initiations of repair,
the MinZero prompt showed a precision of 0.72, being a good
performance in accurately identifying correct instances. Its recall
was 0.84, and the weighted F1-score stood at an excellent 0.91.
The MaxZero prompt resulted in lower precision and recall of 0.68
and 0.78 respectively, with an F1-score of 0.89, again due to GPT
correctly classifying the high rate of negative cases in the manually
coded dataset, positively skewing the F1-score. Finally, the MaxFew
prompt had a remarkably high precision of 0.91 and a moderate
recall of 0.64, suggesting room for improvement in capturing all
relevant instances of other-initiations of repair. The F1-score stood
at 0.91.

5.2.3 Harm
For the ordinal harm classification, the MinZero prompt, which
did not include an explicit description of the full ordinal scale, had
an agreement score of 0.34 and a weighted kappa of 0.57, indicating
a surprising moderate level of agreement between human coding
and LLM coding. The MaxZero prompt, while more detailed,
scored lower in both agreement and weighted kappa, with values
of 0.34 and 0.51 respectively. The MaxFew prompt, which included
additional examples, achieved similar agreement to MaxZero at
0.33 but a slightly lower weighted kappa of 0.49. Interestingly, the
MinZero prompt’s higher scores suggest that additional detail in the
MaxZero and MaxFew prompts did not correspond to improved
alignment with human coders in ordinal harm classification.

5.2 Aim 2: to test the validity of the ﬁnal
LLM prompts

5.2.4 Observations on prompt types
We observed no consistent performance difference among
the MinZero, MaxZero, and MaxFew prompts across the three
datasets. Whilst some runs suggested an escalating performance
from MinZero to MaxFew, other runs over the same dataset
showed the opposite pattern, clearly showcasing the stochastic
nature of GPT (Bender et al., 2021). Accordingly, the appropriate
level of concept definition and use of examples may depend on
the psychological phenomenon in question. Thus, we recommend
testing various prompt designs to ascertain what works best in any
given context.

This section presents the results of the study focusing
on the confirmatory predictive validity of using GPT-4o for
psychological text classification. As such, we tested whether our
prompts generalized to unseen data. We summarize our findings
in Table 4.

5.2.1 Reported speech
The reported speech classification results reveal distinct,
though not drastically different outcomes for each prompt. The
MinZero prompt, despite its brief definition and lack of examples,
achieved a precision of 0.88, indicating a high rate of accurate
positive predictions. However, its recall was 0.65, suggesting it
failed to identify roughly a third of the actual instances of
reported speech, yet the overall F1-score was still an excellent 0.89,
presumably due to the natural distribution of reported speech in
the dataset (24% of cases are positive, and many of the negative
cases as coded by human coders were correctly classified by GPT).
MaxZero offered more balance, with a precision of 0.82 and a
recall of 0.74, culminating in an F1-score of 0.90. The MaxFew
prompt achieved a precision of 0.85 and the highest recall of
0.77, attaining the best F1-score of 0.91, and indicating the most
effective performance in classifying reported speech within the
test dataset.

Frontiers in Social Psychology

6 Discussion
Our central aim was to explore the potential of LLMs to
validly classify psychological phenomena in text. To this end, we
first conducted an iterative prompt development stage, during
which we developed the prompts’ semantic validity, exploratory
predictive validity, and content validity. We then performed
confirmatory predictive validity testing on our test dataset to
assess whether our developed prompts can successfully complete
a text classification task on unseen data. Our results contribute
support to Bail’s (2024) suggestion that LLMs can serve as valid
coders of psychological phenomena in text. This rests on the
condition that the researcher works with the LLM to ensure
semantic, predictive, and content validity. Moreover, our study
reveals a secondary contribution: LLMs can foster an intellectual

11

frontiersin.org

Bunt et al.

10.3389/frsps.2025.1460277

partnership with researchers, enabling a dynamic and iterative
text classification process where the generative capabilities of
LLMs assist in conducting essential validity checks. This highlights
the potential of LLMs as collaborative partners in psychological
research, suggesting a paradigm shift toward more interactive and
reflexive methods in text classification.
Specifically, we observed that small changes in terminology
can unlock the LLM’s correct understanding of the intended
psychological phenomenon, demonstrating the importance of
examining the prompts’ semantic validity. A prompt with high
semantic validity closely corresponds in meaning to the intended
psychological phenomenon in the target data. To achieve semantic
validity, we must challenge the presumption that humans are the
gold standard, recognizing instead that the LLM’s unique design
may require adapting our preferred terminology. In addition,
our analyses suggested that the prompts’ content validity is at
least in part contingent on the simplicity, direct observability,
and common-sense nature of the psychological phenomenon in
question. Indeed, reported speech and other-initiations of repair
fulfill these criteria. Here, LLM-classifications had high accuracy
and discrepancies in coding were attributable to relatively few
LLM and human errors as well as edge cases. However, LLMclassifications were less satisfactory for the concept of harm,
highlighting current limitations and biases in the LLM as well
as intrinsic methodological complexities in psychological text
classification. Finally, the exploratory predictive validity and
confirmatory predictive validity tests serve as quantitative checks
as to the agreement between human coding and LLM coding at two
different stages in the text classification process.
Our prompts exhibited excellent exploratory and confirmatory
predictive validity when instructed to classify reported speech in
online diaries and other-initiations of repair in Reddit dialogues.
They exhibit moderate exploratory and confirmatory predictive
validity when ordinally classifying harm caused by safety incidents
described in healthcare complaints. Overall, LLMs show great
promise for scaling up psychological text classification when used
in a synergistic and iterative approach on big qualitative datasets.
We now discuss implications for the methodology itself, as well as
the field of psychology at large.

inference are required present challenges (e.g., extracting reported
speech vs. inferring harm from a sequence of events). Even though
reported speech and other-initiations of repair are conceptually
complex, they were easier to measure than harm, perhaps because
the LLM has a better inherent semantic understanding of those
concepts. Harm caused by medical error is not only a subjective
construct, but also must be attributed to an event or cause—
and distinguished from the harm that led the patient into the
hospital. While future advancements in LLMs’ developments might
enable classification of more complex phenomena, we maintain
that it remains advisable to operationalize concepts or constructs
in simple, empirical terms with the underlying conceptualization
clearly spelled out to ensure validity (see also Bergner, 2024;
Bringmann et al., 2022; Krpan, 2022).
Our results highlight the importance of considering the use
of LLMs for psychological text classification as an “intellectual
partnership” between humans and technology, where “results
greatly depend on joint effort” (Salomon et al., 1991; p. 3).
We argue that the LLM’s added value in psychological text
classification lies with its afforded use as a “companion” with which
a researcher can engage in exploratory, synergistic loops over their
conceptualizations and operationalizations. Doing such recursive
refinements is indeed a process that can be done with human
iteration alone, yet is considerably faster and more cost-effective
with an LLM (Bail, 2024; De Kok, 2023; Korinek, 2023). In contrast,
LLMs may provide independent and instant feedback, for example
in deliberative dialogue using an interface such as ChatGPT, or by
pushing back on the concept or task instructions it was given. Such
feedback makes LLMs stand out from other classification methods,
such as traditional supervised machine learning, that cannot be
used to generate explanations and rationales for the ways they
categorize text. However, LLMs are not unbiased (Bail, 2024; Ray,
2023), and various scholars have warned against the risks of using
LLMs in qualitative research (Beghetto et al., 2024; Lindebaum
and Fleming, 2024; Roberts et al., 2024). Moreover, the intellectual
partnership requires caution to avoid potential pitfalls; for example,
researchers might unintentionally tailor their coding manuals to
align too closely with the LLM’s outputs, creating a feedback loop
that compromises the objectivity of the validation process.
Working with an LLM in psychological text classification can
also support abduction, where the dynamic adjustments and the
incorporation of new understandings in real-time can enhance
the robustness and relevance of the research findings (Gillespie
et al., 2024; Grimmer et al., 2022). Abduction is a mode of logical
inference, alongside induction and deduction, that is focused
on generating and refining theory based on surprising findings
or discoveries (Peirce, 1955; Tavory and Timmermans, 2014).
Inductive analysis typically involves the bottom-up generation of
theories based on specific observations, while deductive analysis
involves testing hypotheses based on existing theories. Inductive
and deductive approaches are most commonly used in the social
sciences, yet they are relatively unresponsive to new insights
(Grimmer et al., 2022). In contrast, working with an LLM presents
the opportunity to do recursive refinements of the manual coding
framework, gold standard dataset and prompts. This is because
immediate feedback from LLMs, even after runs over a few units
of data, can reveal if one’s conceptualization or operationalization
is fuzzy or ineffective. This makes the use of LLMs in psychological

6.1 Implications
Our results contribute insight into what types of concepts and
constructs are currently measurable with LLMs. Specifically, we
observe a marked performance difference in the classification of
reported speech and other-initiations of repair on the one hand, and
the classification of harm on the other. The former two are more
directly observable concepts, while the latter is a complex ordinal
construct for which much contextual inference is required, and
which involves nuanced judgments on cause and effect. Despite our
efforts to describe the construct of harm in such a way that it was
constituted of measurable elements, GPT-4o’s harm classification
performance remained moderate. This highlights the varying
degrees of measurability in different phenomena, suggesting that
more directly observable phenomena are more readily classified
by GPT, while concepts and constructs for which higher levels of

Frontiers in Social Psychology

12

frontiersin.org

Bunt et al.

10.3389/frsps.2025.1460277

where the LLM augments human capabilities, functioning as a
sense-check of whether the phenomena we are interested in are
measurable in the target data. Only after achieving a well-defined
conceptual framework that is “understood” by the LLM, can we
fully leverage the potential of LLMs. This includes their capacity
to scale up psychological text classification through the use of
large, qualitative datasets. Such scaling up offers a promising
avenue for achieving greater external and ecological validity, thus
facilitating a more comprehensive and real-world understanding of
psychological phenomena (Chang et al., 2021; Gillespie et al., 2024;
Jackson et al., 2022; Kjell et al., 2019).

text classification stand out in comparison to both manual and
non-generative automated approaches, neither of which enable the
same number of iterations for the same effort or price. Thus, in
so far as iterating on the data leads to improved validity of a text
classification protocol, the speed and affordability of using LLMs
to classify text enables more rapid and frequent iteration, which
in turn can improve the overall quality of both the measurement
protocol and the conceptualization of the concept being measured.
In practice, this requires researchers to refine and adjust
their operationalizations of psychological phenomena based on
exploratory testing during the prompt-development stage. This is
a dynamic, iterative process rather than a static, one-off task, and
stands in contrast to the deductive approach to developing text
classifiers. A strict deductive approach dictates that we cannot look
beyond our pre-established theories and hypotheses, and thereby
limits creative and exploratory testing (Grimmer et al., 2022;
Rubin and Donkin, 2022). Instead, working abductively with LLMs
for psychological text classification implicates that exploratory
prompt development can be conducted on the development dataset
with two aims. The first aim is for the human to learn the
terminology of the LLM for talking about the phenomenon of
interest, and thereby improving LLM classification performance.
Through deliberation with the LLM and reflecting on its pushback
regarding our concept operationalizations, the second aim is to
achieve conceptual clarity on one’s psychological phenomenon
of interest, being an important area of development to advance
psychology as a science (Bringmann et al., 2022; Krpan, 2022). It
is important to stress that the final prompt should be validated on
the test dataset (withheld from development) to ensure that the
prompt does not overfit or underfit the psychological phenomenon
of interest, as well as to safeguard the integrity of the analysis (Rubin
and Donkin, 2022; Song et al., 2020).
The abductive affordances of an LLM-based psychological text
classification highlight problems with using statistical evaluations
of validity without qualitative oversight. For example, we found that
cases labeled as “false positives” or “false negatives” may be part of
systematic biases or errors in either human or LLM coding, which
only can be revealed after a comprehensive qualitative analysis of
these cases, a point which has gone underappreciated in the current
literature (Pangakis et al., 2023; Rathje et al., 2023; Törnberg,
2024). Such qualitative checks enable researchers to gain a clearer
understanding of what constitutes correct coding by the human
or LLM, and presents opportunities for learning (Gillespie et al.,
2024). Indeed, while acknowledging that both humans and LLMs
make errors, certain discrepancies may, upon careful consideration,
warrant addressing at their problem source. As noted above, not
only is the pace at which these recursive adjustments can be
completed unprecedented, they are also crucial to improve the
final semantic, predictive, and content validity of one’s LLM-based
psychological text classification.
In summary, there is high potential for LLMs to improve
the validity of psychological text classification. Specifically, due
to their abductive affordances, LLMs have the potential to
advance conceptualization and operationalization of psychological
phenomena in text, being promising tools for addressing validity
challenges (Bringmann et al., 2022; Flake et al., 2022; Flake and
Fried, 2020). Key to this process is an “intellectual partnership”
defined by a synergistic and recursive text classification process

Frontiers in Social Psychology

6.2 Practical considerations
LLMs do not make manual coding redundant. Manually
coded data is required to create the gold standard dataset that is
central to both the development and testing stages (Grimmer and
Stewart, 2013). When creating the manually coded dataset, the
natural distribution of the psychological phenomenon should be
considered: a lower ratio of positive to negative cases demands a
larger dataset than when the positive and negative cases are equally
present. The associated time and resource investment that manual
coding requires may render this methodology less suitable for
small-scale research projects. Instead, the methodology’s strength
particularly lies with its application to large, qualitative datasets,
once the prompt(s) are developed and validated. That said,
one may decide to merely explore the conceptualization and
operationalization of a given psychological phenomenon in a small
sample of text so as to abductively deepen one’s understanding
of it. This approach is a highly appropriate way of leveraging the
strengths of LLMs on a smaller scale. We did not formalize this
process, however, and future research should explore how LLMs
can be rigorously integrated in the manual coding process prior to
developing classifiers.

6.3 Limitations
There are currently several general limitations to the use of
LLMs for text classification. Although commercial proprietary
LLMs (such as GPT-4o) are much more cost-effective than manual
coding, they still do incur a small cost. Proprietary LLMs are
also closed-source, which means that it is difficult to control
biases within the models and ensure reproducibility, as changes
to the model are opaque (Bail, 2024). Moreover, proprietary
LLMs incorporate built-in guardrails that can impact classification
performance by, for example, steering away from sensitive topics or,
in some cases, refusing to classify text that violates company policy
altogether. Hopefully, open-source LLMs tailored to academic
research will be developed which will allow better investigation
of bias, version control, and reproducibility. In addition, ethical
considerations remain complex when applying LLMs to personal
or sensitive data, such as healthcare complaints, given the risk that
such data could inadvertently become part of the LLM’s training
data (Törnberg, 2024). Working with LLMs also requires minimal
coding skills. These are needed to operationalize the LLM, to

13

frontiersin.org

Bunt et al.

10.3389/frsps.2025.1460277

should not obscure our deeper, and perhaps more important,
finding. By enabling rapid iteration (e.g., classifying hundreds of
texts in minutes), LLMs can improve the fit between our concepts
and the textual data, enabling researchers to explore a wider range
of conceptualizations, and then iteratively optimize these. Thus,
LLMs may mark a paradigm shift away from single-shot codebook
creation and application, toward a more iterative approach to text
classification that improves the overall validity of our concepts
and operationalizations.

prepare text data for analysis, and evaluate the model’s output.
However, this is significantly less complex code than when training
a machine learning model. Moreover, LLMs such as ChatGPT
increasingly have the ability to generate high-quality code, and thus
guide users in the coding necessary to use them (De Kok, 2023).
Whilst this affordance does not eliminate the need to understand
and troubleshoot the generated code, it certainly does help to
democratize computer programming.
Moving onto our own methodological limitations, there are
four shortcomings associated with our choice of using GPT-4o.
First, we have obtained insights into the workings of GPT-4o
(as well as GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 Turbo to a limited extent), yet
we cannot say with certainty that our validity-related results will
apply to other LLMs, or future versions of GPT. In addition,
future research should explore different prompting strategies—
including examining the effects of assigning various roles—to
further enhance prompt performance and validity. Second, the
closed-source nature of GPT-4o means that we are working with
a black box: we have limited insights into why the model answers
the way it answers (Bail, 2024). Especially the stochastic nature
of LLMs like GPT-4o, referring to the fact that their output may
differ with every run over the same input (Bender et al., 2021),
is problematic for truly understanding the workings of the LLM
and how to best leverage it. Moreover, this black box nature
impedes a straightforward mapping between prompt modifications
and performance, thus requiring a holistic approach and human
judgement to determine whether the prompt achieves its intended
goals. Therefore, our recommendation is to rely on open-source
LLMs where possible, which additionally bypass data privacy
concerns that are associated with the use of closed-source LLMs
(Alfano et al., 2022; Ray, 2023). Moreover, future updates to
proprietary LLMs—which may occur without our knowledge—
could affect their performance, potentially impacting the validity
and reproducibility of our results over time. Third, our method is
limited by the exclusive use of prompt engineering for developing
our classifiers. Even though other methods such as model finetuning and RAG-based approaches could have been leveraged (De
Kok, 2023), we deemed these more advanced steps unnecessary due
to the performance of our prompts being sufficient for the current
purposes. Besides, prompt engineering in particular facilitates
control over the semantic validity of one’s prompts. Finally, LLMs
are increasingly able to process multimodal input, such as text,
audio, images, and video—each of which may provide rich insight
into human behavior and mental states (Gillespie et al., 2024). We
recommend that additional modalities beyond text are explored
to deepen and broaden the use of LLMs for the classification of
psychological phenomena in naturally occurring data.

Data availability statement
The data analyzed in this study is subject to the following
licenses/restrictions: the datasets contain private or sensitive
information and are therefore not publicly available. Requests to
access these datasets should be directed to h.l.bunt@lse.ac.uk.

Author contributions
HB: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. AGo:
Writing – review & editing. TR: Writing – review & editing. AGi:
Writing – review & editing.

Funding
The author(s) declare financial support was received for
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. This
research was funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation
(grant number: 51NF40-205605).

Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.

7 Conclusion
Supplementary material

Our findings demonstrate the promising potential of using
LLMs for psychological text classification. Specifically, LLMs can be
used to validly classify psychological phenomena in text, provided
that the researcher works with the LLM to secure semantic,
predictive, and content validity. However, this headline finding

Frontiers in Social Psychology

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/frsps.2025.
1460277/full#supplementary-material

14

frontiersin.org

Bunt et al.

10.3389/frsps.2025.1460277

References
Alfano, M., Sullivan, E., and Ebrahimi Fard, A. (2022). “Ethical pitfalls for natural
language processing in psychology,” in Handbook of Language Analysis in Psychology,
eds. M. Dehghani and R. L. Boyd (New York, NY: Guilford Publications), 511–530.

Gillespie, A., and Reader, T. W. (2018). Patient-centered insights: using health care
complaints to reveal hot spots and blind spots in quality and safety. Milbank Q. 96,
530–567. doi: 10.1111/1468-0009.12338

Aveling, E.-L., Gillespie, A., and Cornish, F. (2015). A qualitative method for
analysing multivoicedness. Qual. Res. 15, 670–687. doi: 10.1177/1468794114557991

Goddard, A., and Gillespie, A. (2023). Textual indicators of deliberative dialogue:
a systematic review of methods for studying the quality of online dialogues. Soc. Sci.
Comput. Rev. 41, 2364–2385. doi: 10.1177/08944393231156629

Bail, C. A. (2024). Can generative AI improve social science? Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 121:e2314021121. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2314021121

Grimmer, J., Roberts, M. E., and Stewart, B. M. (2022). Text as Data: A New
Framework for Machine Learning and the Social Sciences. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

Bakhtin, M. (1984). Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press. doi: 10.5749/j.ctt22727z1

Grimmer, J., and Stewart, B. M. (2013). Text as data: the promise and pitfalls
of automatic content analysis methods for political texts. Polit. Anal. 21, 267–297.
doi: 10.1093/pan/mps028

Beghetto, R. A., Ross, W., Karwowski, M., and Glăveanu, V. P. (2024). Partnering
with AI for instrument development: possibilities and pitfalls. New Ideas Psychol.
76:101121. doi: 10.1016/j.newideapsych.2024.101121

Healey, P. G. T., Mills, G. J., Eshghi, A., and Howes, C. (2018). Running repairs:
coordinating meaning in dialogue. Top. Cogn. Sci. 10, 367–388. doi: 10.1111/tops.12336

Belotto, M. J. (2018). Data analysis methods for qualitative research: Managing
the challenges of coding, interrater reliability, and thematic analysis. Qual. Rep. 23,
2622–2633. doi: 10.46743/2160-3715/2018.3492

Holleman, G. A., Hooge, I. T. C., Kemner, C., and Hessels, R. S. (2020). The “realworld approach” and its problems: a critique of the term ecological validity. Front.
Psychol. 11:721. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00721

Bender, E. M., Gebru, T., McMillan-Major, A., and Shmitchell, S. (2021). “On the
dangers of stochastic parrots: can language models be too big?” in Proceedings of the
ACM FAccT, 610–623. doi: 10.1145/3442188.3445922

Holt, E. (2000). Reporting and reacting: concurrent responses to reported speech.
Res. Lang. Soc. Interact. 33, 425–454. doi: 10.1207/S15327973RLSI3304_04

Bergner, R. M. (2024). Establishing correct concept meanings in psychology: why
should we care and how can we do it? Am. Psychol. 14, 1–12. doi: 10.1037/amp0001412

Jackson, J. C., Watts, J., List, J.-M., Puryear, C., Drabble, R., and Lindquist, K.
A. (2022). From text to thought: how analyzing language can advance psychological
science. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 17, 805–826. doi: 10.1177/17456916211004899

Birkenmaier, L., Lechner, C., and Wagner, C. (2023). The search for solid ground in
text as data: a systematic review of validation approaches. Commun. Methods Meas. 18,
249–277. doi: 10.1080/19312458.2023.2285765

Kennedy, B., Ashokkumar, A., Boyd, R. L., and Dehghani, M. (2021). “Text analysis
for psychology: methods, principles, and practices,” in Handbook of language analysis
in psychology, eds. M. Dehghani and R. L. Boyd (London: The Guilford Press), 3–62.
doi: 10.31234/osf.io/h2b8t

Boyd, R. L., and Schwartz, H. A. (2021). Natural language analysis and the
psychology of verbal behavior: the past, present, and future states of the field. J. Lang.
Soc. Psychol. 40, 21–41. doi: 10.1177/0261927X20967028

Kjell, O. N. E., Kjell, K., Garcia, D., and Sikström, S. (2019). Semantic measures:
using natural language processing to measure, differentiate, and describe psychological
constructs. Psychol. Methods 24, 92–115. doi: 10.1037/met0000191

Bringmann, L. F., Elmer, T., and Eronen, M. I. (2022). Back to basics: the importance
of conceptual clarification in psychological science. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 31, 340–346.
doi: 10.1177/09637214221096485

Korinek, A. (2023). Generative AI for economic research: use cases and implications
for economists. J. Econ. Lit. 61, 1281–1317. doi: 10.1257/jel.20231736

Brown, T. B., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J., Dhariwal, P., et al. (2020).
Language models are few-shot learners. Available at: http://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165
(accessed September 19, 2023).

Krippendorff, K. (2004). Content Analysis: An Introduction to its Methodology.
Thousand Oaks, CA; London; New Delhi: SAGE Publications.

Chandrasekharan, E., Samory, M., Jhaver, S., Charvat, H., Bruckman, A., Lampe,
C., et al. (2018). The internet’s hidden rules: an empirical study of Reddit norm
violations at micro, meso, and macro scales. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 2,
1–25. doi: 10.1145/3274301

Krpan, D. (2022). (When) should psychology be a science? J. Theory Soc. Behav. 52,
183–198. doi: 10.1111/jtsb.12316
Lee, L. W., Dabirian, A., McCarthy, I. P., and Kietzmann, J. (2020). Making sense
of text: artificial intelligence-enabled content analysis. Eur. J. Mark. 54, 615–644.
doi: 10.1108/EJM-02-2019-0219

Chang, T., DeJonckheere, M., Vydiswaran, V. G. V., Li, J., Buis, L. R.,
and Guetterman, T. C. (2021). Accelerating mixed methods research with
natural language processing of big text data. J. Mix. Methods Res. 15, 398–412.
doi: 10.1177/15586898211021196

Lindebaum, D., and Fleming, P. (2024). ChatGPT undermines human reflexivity,
scientific responsibility and responsible management research. Br. J. Manag. 35,
566–575. doi: 10.1111/1467-8551.12781

De Kok, T. (2023). Generative LLMs and textual analysis in accounting: (Chat)GPT
as research assistant? SSRN Electronic Journal. doi: 10.2139/ssrn.4429658

Linell, P. (2009). Rethinking Language, Mind, and World Dialogically: Interactional
and Contextual Theories of Human Sense-Making. Charlotte, North Carolina:
Information Age Publishing.

De Raadt, A., Warrens, M. J., Bosker, R. J., and Kiers, H. A. L. (2021). A
comparison of reliability coefficients for ordinal rating scales. J. Classif. 38, 519–543.
doi: 10.1007/s00357-021-09386-5

Lucy, J. A. (1993). Reflexive Language: Reported Speech and Metapragmatics.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511621031

Demszky, D., Yang, D., Yeager, D. S., Bryan, C. J., Clapper, M., Chandhok, S., et al.
(2023). Using large language models in psychology. Nat. Rev. Psychol. 2, 688–701.
doi: 10.1038/s44159-023-00241-5

Marková, I. (2016). The Dialogical Mind: Common Sense and Ethics. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511753602

Dingemanse, M., and Enfield, N. J. (2015). Other-initiated repair across
languages: towards a typology of conversational structures. Open Linguist. 1, 96–118.
doi: 10.2478/opli-2014-0007

Matter, D., Schirmer, M., Grinberg, N., and Pfeffer, J. (2024). Investigating the
increase of violent speech in Incel communities with human-guided GPT-4 prompt
iteration. Front. Soc. Psychol. 2:1383152. doi: 10.3389/frsps.2024.1383152

Flake, J. K., Davidson, I. J., Wong, O., and Pek, J. (2022). Construct validity and
the validity of replication studies: a systematic review. Am. Psychol. 77, 576–588.
doi: 10.1037/amp0001006

Meredith, J. (2020). Conversation analysis, cyberpsychology and online interaction.
Soc. Pers. Psychol. Compass. 14:e12529. doi: 10.1111/spc3.12529

Flake, J. K., and Fried, E. I. (2020). Measurement schmeasurement: questionable
measurement practices and how to avoid them. Adv. Meth. Pract. Psychol. Sci. 3,
456–465. doi: 10.1177/2515245920952393

Meredith, J., Giles, D., and Stommel, W. J. P. (2021). “Introduction: the
microanalysis of digital interaction,” in Analysing digital interaction, eds. J. Meredith,
D. Giles, and W. Stommel (Cham: Springer International Publishing), 1–21.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-64922-7_1

Freud, S. (1914). The Psychopathology of Everyday Life. New York: The Macmillan
Company. doi: 10.1037/10012-000

Messick, S. (1995). Validity of psychological assessment: validation of inferences
from persons’ responses and performances as scientific inquiry into score meaning.
Am. Psychol. 50:741. doi: 10.1037/0003-066X.50.9.741

Gilardi, F., Alizadeh, M., and Kubli, M. (2023). ChatGPT outperforms crowdworkers for text-annotation tasks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 120:e2305016120.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2305016120

Morse, J. M. (2010). “Cherry picking”: writing from thin data. Qual. Health Res.
20:3. doi: 10.1177/1049732309354285

Gillespie, A., Glǎveanu, V., and de Saint Laurent, C. (2024). Pragmatism and
Methodology: Doing Research that Matters with Mixed Methods. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. doi: 10.1017/9781009031066

NPSA (2008). A risk matrix for risk managers. Available at: https://nhgerm.
wordpress.com/wp-content/uploads/2010/02/11-npsa_risk_matrix_for_risk_
managers_v91.pdf (accessed June 26, 2023).

Gillespie, A., and Reader, T. W. (2016). The Healthcare Complaints Analysis
Tool: development and reliability testing of a method for service monitoring and
organisational learning. BMJ Qual. Saf. 25, 937–946. doi: 10.1136/bmjqs-2015-004596

Frontiers in Social Psychology

Open Science Collaboration (2015). Estimating the reproducibility of psychological
science. Science 349:aac4716. doi: 10.1126/science.aac4716

15

frontiersin.org

Bunt et al.

10.3389/frsps.2025.1460277

Schegloff, E. A., Jefferson, G., and Sacks, H. (1977). The preference for selfcorrection in the organization of repair in conversation. Language 53, 361–382.
doi: 10.1353/lan.1977.0041

OpenAI (2023). Docs. Available at: https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/gptbest-practices/six-strategies-for-getting-better-results (accessed August 22, 2023).
OpenAI (2024). API reference. Available at: https://platform.openai.com/docs/apireference/introduction (accessed May 16, 2024).

Schimmack, U. (2012). The ironic effect of significant results on the credibility of
multiple-study articles. Psychol. Methods 17, 551–566. doi: 10.1037/a0029487

Pangakis, N., Wolken, S., and Fasching, N. (2023). Automated annotation with
generative AI requires validation. arXiv Preprint arXiv:2306.00176.

Schimmack, U. (2021). The validation crisis in psychology. Meta-Psychol. 5:1645.
doi: 10.15626/MP.2019.1645

Patil, R., Heston, T. F., and Bhuse, V. (2024). Prompt engineering in healthcare. J.
Electron. 13:2961. doi: 10.3390/electronics13152961
Peirce, C. S. (1955). Philosophical Writings of Peirce. Mineola, New York: Dover
Publications, Inc.

Seawright, J. (2016). Multi-Method Social Science: Combining Qualitative
and
Quantitative
Tools.
Cambridge:
Cambridge
University
Press.
doi: 10.1017/CBO9781316160831

Rai, T. S., and Fiske, A. (2010). ODD (observation-and description-deprived)
psychological research. Behav. Brain Sci. 33:106. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X100
00221

Simmons, J. P., Nelson, L. D., and Simonsohn, U. (2011). False-positive psychology:
undisclosed flexibility in data collection and analysis allows presenting anything as
significant. Psychol. Sci. 22, 1359–1366. doi: 10.1177/0956797611417632

Rathje, S., Mirea, D.-M., Sucholutsky, I., Marjieh, R., Robertson, C., and Van Bavel,
J. J. (2023). GPT is an effective tool for multilingual psychological text analysis. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A. 121:e2308950121. doi: 10.31234/osf.io/sekf5

Song, H., Tolochko, P., Eberl, J.-M., Eisele, O., Greussing, E., Heidenreich, T., et al.
(2020). In validations we trust? The impact of imperfect human annotations as a gold
standard on the quality of validation of automated content analysis. Polit. Commun. 37,
550–572. doi: 10.1080/10584609.2020.1723752

Ray, P. P. (2023). ChatGPT: A comprehensive review on background, applications,
key challenges, bias, ethics, limitations and future scope. IOTCPS 3, 121–154.
doi: 10.1016/j.iotcps.2023.04.003

Tausczik, Y. R., and Pennebaker, J. W. (2010). The psychological meaning of
words: LIWC and computerized text analysis methods. J. Lang. Soc. Psychol. 29, 24–54.
doi: 10.1177/0261927X09351676

Reddy, M., and Ortony, A. (1979). “Metaphor and thought,” in The Conduit
Metaphor, 21–43.

Tavory,
I.,
and
Timmermans,
S.
Theorizing Qualitative Research. Chicago:
doi: 10.7208/chicago/9780226180458.001.0001

Reiss, M. V. (2023). Testing the reliability of ChatGPT for text annotation and
classification: a cautionary remark. arXiv Preprint arXiv:2304.11085.

Törnberg, P. (2023). ChatGPT-4 outperforms experts and crowd workers
in annotating political twitter messages with zero-shot learning. arXiv
Preprint arXiv:2304.06588.

Roberts, J., Baker, M., and Andrew, J. (2024). Artificial intelligence and
qualitative research: the promise and perils of large language model (LLM)
“assistance.” Crit. Perspect. Account. 99:102722. doi: 10.1016/j.cpa.2024.
102722

Törnberg, P. (2024). Best practices for text annotation with large language models.
arXiv Preprint arXiv:2402.05129.

Rubin, M., and Donkin, C. (2022). Exploratory hypothesis tests can be more
compelling than confirmatory hypothesis tests. Philos. Psychol. 37, 2019–2047.
doi: 10.1080/09515089.2022.2113771

Van Atteveldt, W., Van Der Velden, M. A. C. G., and Boukes, M. (2021).
The validity of sentiment analysis: Comparing manual annotation, crowd-coding,
dictionary approaches, and machine learning algorithms. Commun. Methods Meas. 15,
121–140. doi: 10.1080/19312458.2020.1869198

Sacks, H., Schegloff, E. A., and Jefferson, G. (1974). A simplest systematics
for the organization of turn-taking for conversation. Language 50, 696–735.
doi: 10.1353/lan.1974.0010

Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Ichter, B., Xia, F., et al. (2022).
Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst. 35, 24824–24837. doi: 10.5555/3600270.3602070

Salomon, G., Perkins, D. N., and Globerson, T. (1991). Partners in cognition:
extending human intelligence with intelligent technologies. Educ. Res. J. 20, 2–9.
doi: 10.3102/0013189X020003002

Yarkoni, T. (2022). The generalizability crisis. Behav. Brain Sci. 45:e1.
doi: 10.1017/S0140525X21001758

Schegloff, E. A. (2007). Sequence Organization in Interaction: A
Primer in Conversation Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511791208

Frontiers in Social Psychology

(2014).
Abductive
Analysis:
University of Chicago Press.

Ziems, C., Held, W., Shaikh, O., Chen, J., and Zhang, Z. (2023). Can large language
models transform computational social science? arXiv Preprint arXiv.2305.03514.

16

frontiersin.org

