                                HHS Public Access
                                Author manuscript
                                Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.




Author Manuscript
                    Published in final edited form as:
                     Psychol Assess. 2019 December ; 31(12): 1412–1427. doi:10.1037/pas0000626.



                    Constructing Validity: New Developments in Creating Objective
                    Measuring Instruments
                    Lee Anna Clark, David Watson [Psychological Assessment]
                    Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame

                    Abstract




Author Manuscript
                         In this update of Clark and Watson (1995), we provide a synopsis of major points of our earlier
                         article and discuss issues in scale construction that have become more salient as clinical and
                         personality assessment has progressed over the past quarter-century. The primary goal of scale
                         development is still to create valid measures of underlying constructs and that Loevinger’s
                         theoretical scheme provides a powerful model for scale development. We still discuss practical
                         issues to help developers maximize their measures’ construct validity, reiterating the importance of
                         (1) clear conceptualization of target constructs; (2) an overinclusive initial item pool; (3) paying
                         careful attention to item wording; (3) testing the item pool against closely related constructs; (4)
                         choosing validation samples thoughtfully; and (5) emphasizing unidimensionality over internal
                         consistency. We have added (6) consideration of the hierarchical structures of personality and
                         psychopathology in scale development; discussion of (7) co-developing scales in the context of
                         these structures; (8) “orphan,” and “interstitial” constructs, which do not fit neatly within these




Author Manuscript
                         structures; (9) problems with “conglomerate” constructs; and (10) developing alternative versions
                         of measures, including short forms, translations, informant versions, and age-based adaptations.
                         Finally, we have expanded our discussions of (10) item-response theory and of external validity,
                         emphasizing (11) convergent and discriminant validity, (12) incremental validity, and (13) cross-
                         method analyses, such as questionnaires and interviews. We conclude by re-affirming that all
                         mature sciences are built on the bedrock of sound measurement and that psychology must
                         redouble its efforts to develop reliable and valid measures.


                    Keywords
                         test construction; scale development; questionnaire development; measurement, construct validity;
                         convergent validity; discriminant validity; incremental validity; item analysis; psychopathology;
                         personality structure




Author Manuscript
                                     Clark and Watson (1995) discussed theoretical principles, practical issues, and pragmatic
                                     decisions in the process of objective scale development to maximize the construct validity of
                                     measures. In this article, we reiterate a few points we discussed previously that continue to



                    There is no licensing fee for use of the SNAP family of measures for non-commercial, unfunded research. For all other uses, LAC
                    negotiates a mutually acceptable licensing fee.
                    Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Lee Anna Clark, Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame,
                    E390 Corbett Family Hall, Notre Dame, IN 46556. may be sent to la.clark@nd.edu.
                    Lee Anna Clark and David Watson, Department of Psychology, The University of Notre Dame.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                                  Page 2


                                         be underappreciated or largely ignored, but we primarily discuss additional issues that have




Author Manuscript
                                         become important due to advances in the field over the past 2+ decades. As before, we focus
                                         on language-mediated measures (vs., e.g., coding of direct observations), on scales with
                                         clinical relevance (i.e., those of most interest to readers of this journal) and on measures that
                                         are indeed intended to measure a construct (vs., e.g., a checklist to assess mortality risk that
                                         could be used to make valid inferences for the purpose of life insurance premiums1).
                                         Readers are encouraged to review the previous paper for points underdeveloped in this one,
                                         as we often provide here only a synopsis of the earlier material.


                       The Centrality of Psychological Measurement
                                         Measurement is fundamental in science, and, arguably, the two most important qualities
                                         related to measurement are reliability and validity. Note that we say “measurement” not
                                         “measure.” Despite the thousands of times that some variant of the phrase “(measure) X has




Author Manuscript
                                         been shown to have good reliability and validity” has appeared in articles’ Method sections,2
                                         the phrase is vacuous. Validity in particular is not a property of a measure, but pertains to
                                         interpretations of measurements. As first stated by Cronbach and Meehl (1955), “One does
                                         not validate a test, but only a principle for making inferences” (p. 297). Similarly, the 5th
                                         edition of the Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing (AERA, APA, & NCME,
                                         2014) states unequivocally, “Validity refers to the degree to which evidence and theory
                                         support the interpretations of test scores for proposed uses of a test. Validity is, therefore, the
                                         most fundamental consideration in developing and evaluating tests” (p. 11). Accordingly,
                                         investigating a measure’s construct validity necessarily involves empirical tests of
                                         hypothesized relations among theory-based constructs and their observable manifestations
                                         (Cronbach & Meehl, 1955), and absent an articulated theory (i.e., “the nomological net”),
                                         there is no construct validity. Despite the implication that a series of interrelated




Author Manuscript
                                         investigations is required to understand the construct(s) that a measure assesses, scale
                                         developers often speak rather lightly of establishing a scale’s construct validity in its initial
                                         publication. Cronbach and Meehl (1955) was published 60-plus years ago, and 30+ years
                                         have passed since the 3rd edition of the Standards (APA, 1985), which firmly established
                                         construct validity as the core of measurement. Yet, there remains widespread
                                         misunderstanding regarding the overarching concept of construct validity and what
                                         establishing construct validity entails. Clearly, test developers, not to mention test users,
                                         either do not fully appreciate or willfully choose to ignore the complexity and importance of
                                         the concept.

                       Why should I care about construct validity?
                                         First, construct validity is the foundation of clinical utility. That is, to the extent that real-




Author Manuscript
                                         world decisions (e.g., eligibility for social services, psycho- or pharmaco-therapy selection)
                                         are based on psychological measurements, the quality of those decisions depends on the
                                         construct validity of the measurements on which they are based. Second, practitioners
                                         increasingly are asked to justify use of specific assessment procedures to third-party payers.



                       1We thank an anonymous reviewer with pointing out this issue and providing this example.
                       2So as not to be completely hypocritical, we admit that we, too, use this short-hand language.


                                            Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                              Page 3


                                       Use of psychological measures whose precision and efficiency are well established within an




Author Manuscript
                                       articulated theory that is well supported by multiple types of empirical data (i.e.,
                                       measurements with demonstrated construct validity) may be required in the future. Third,
                                       progress in psychological science, especially as we explore more deeply the interface
                                       between psychosocial and neurobiological systems, is critically dependent on measurement
                                       validity. Detailed understanding of brain activity will be useful only insofar as we can
                                       connect it to phenotypic phenomena, so the more validly and reliably we can measure
                                       experienced affects, behaviors, and cognitions, the more we will be able to advance
                                       psychology and neuroscience.


                       A Theoretical Model for Scale Development
                                       Loevinger’s (1957) monograph remains the most complete exposition of theoretically based
                                       psychological test construction. In both the previous and this article, we offer practical




Author Manuscript
                                       guidance for applying Loevinger’s theoretical approach to the process of scale development,
                                       with specific emphasis on the “three components of construct validity”: substantive,
                                       structural, and external.

                       Substantive Validity: Conceptualization and Development of an Initial Item Pool
                                       Conceptualization.—There is essentially no limit to the number of psychological
                                       constructs that can be operationalized as scales, and sometimes it seems that there is a scale
                                       for every human attribute (e.g., adaptability, belligerence, complexity, docility, efficiency,
                                       flexibility, grit, hardiness, imagination, . . .zest). However, not all of these represent a
                                       sufficiently important and distinct construct to justify scale development. As a thought
                                       experiment, imagine listing not only the thousands of such constructs in the English
                                       language (Allport & Odbert, 1936), but also doing the same for the approximately 7,000




Author Manuscript
                                       existing human languages. No doubt many of the constructs these words represent are highly
                                       overlapping and it would be absurd to argue that each one would make a significant
                                       difference in predicting real-world outcomes. This point holds true even within just the
                                       English language. Thus, an essential early step is to crystallize one’s conceptual model by
                                       writing a precise, reasonably detailed description of the target construct.

                                       Literature Review.—To articulate the basic construct as clearly and thoroughly as
                                       possible, this step should be embedded in a literature review to ensure that the construct
                                       doesn’t already have one or more well-constructed measures and to describe the construct in
                                       its full theoretical and hierarchical-structural context, including its level of abstraction and
                                       how it is distinguished from near-neighbor constructs. For instance, in developing a new
                                       measure of hopelessness, the literature review would encompass not only existing measures




Author Manuscript
                                       of hopelessness, but also measures of related, broader constructs (e.g., depression and
                                       optimism-pessimism), and somewhat less immediately related constructs that might
                                       correlate with the target construct, such as various measures of negative affect (anxiety, guilt
                                       and shame, dissatisfaction, etc.) in order to articulate the hypothesized overlap and
                                       distinctiveness of hopelessness in relation to other negative affects. That is, conceptual
                                       models must articulate both what a construct is and what it is not. The importance of a
                                       comprehensive literature review cannot be overstated, because it enables a clear articulation



                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                                 Page 4


                                       of how the proposed measure(s) will be either a theoretical or an empirical improvement




Author Manuscript
                                       over existing measures or fill an important measurement gap.

                                       Our emphasis on theory and structure is not meant to intimidate or to imply that one must
                                       have from the outset a fully articulated set of interrelated theoretical concepts and know in
                                       advance exactly how the construct will fill a gap in an established hierarchy of psychological
                                       constructs or improve measurement over existing scales. Rather, our point is that serious
                                       consideration of theoretical and structural issues prior to scale construction increases the
                                       likelihood that the resulting scale will make a substantial contribution by providing
                                       significant incremental validity over existing measures, a topic we return to in a subsequent
                                       section.

                                       Hierarchical structure of constructs.—It is now well established that psychological
                                       constructs—at least in the clinical and personality domains that are our focus—are ordered




Author Manuscript
                                       hierarchically at different levels of abstraction or breadth (see Comrey, 1988; Watson, Clark,
                                       & Harkness, 1994). In personality, for instance, one can conceive of the narrow-ish traits of
                                       “talkativeness” and “attention-seeking,” the somewhat broader concepts of “gregariousness”
                                       and “ascendance” that encompass these more specific terms, respectively, and the still more
                                       general disposition of “extraversion” that subsumes all these lower order constructs. Scales
                                       can be developed to assess constructs at each level of abstraction, so a key initial issue that is
                                       too often overlooked is the level at which a construct is expected to fit in a particular
                                       structure.

                                       As our knowledge of the hierarchical structure of personality and psychopathology has
                                       grown, so too has the importance of considering measures as elements in these structures
                                       (vs. focusing on developing a single, isolated scale). In particular, the broader the construct




Author Manuscript
                                       (i.e., the higher it lies in the hierarchy), the more important it is to articulate its lower level
                                       components—that is, to explicate the nature of its multidimensionality. This has become
                                       important enough that in many cases, new scales should not be developed in isolation, but
                                       rather should be “co-developed” with the express intent of considering their convergent and
                                       discriminant validity as part of initial scale development (i.e., not leaving consideration of
                                       convergent and discriminant validity to the later external-validation phase). We discuss this
                                       further in a subsequent section.

                                       Orphan, interstitial, and conglomerate constructs.: Growth in our understanding of
                                       hierarchical structures has increased awareness that not all constructs fit neatly into these
                                       structures. We consider three types of such constructs. Orphan constructs are unidimensional
                                       constructs that load only weakly on any superordinate dimension, and their value is relative




Author Manuscript
                                       to their purpose: They may have significant incremental predictive power over established
                                       constructs for specific outcomes or be important in a particular area of study. For example,
                                       intrinsic religiosity is largely unrelated to the personality-trait hierarchy (Lee, Ogunfowora,
                                       & Ashton, 2005), yet it predicts various mental-health outcomes across the lifespan (e.g.,
                                       Ahmed, Fowler, & Toro, 2011). Similarly, dependency is an important clinical construct t
                                       does not load strongly on any primary personality domain (e.g., Lowe, Edmundson, &
                                       Widiger, 2009).



                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                             Page 5


                                       Interstitial constructs are both unidimensional and blends of two distinct constructs, such




Author Manuscript
                                       that factor analysis of their items yields (1) a single factor on which all scale items load
                                       and/or (2) two (or more) factors that are either (a) orthogonal with all or almost all items
                                       loading on both (all) factors, or (b) highly correlated (i.e., per an oblique rotation). For
                                       example, Watson, Suls, & Haig (2002) showed that self-esteem is unidimensional but yet has
                                       strong loadings on both (low) negative affectivity and positive affectivity, because the
                                       measure’s items themselves inherently encompass variance from both higher order
                                       dimensions. Some interstitial constructs blend two dimensions at the same hierarchical level:
                                       In the interpersonal circumplex (IPC; Zimmermann & Wright, 2017), dominance and
                                       affiliation typically constitute the primary axes, and dimensions that fall between these
                                       define interstitial constructs (e.g., IPC arrogance and introversion-extraversion). In a perfect
                                       circumplex, the axes location is arbitrary; in reality, psychological theory and the utility of
                                       the measures’ empirical findings guide axis placement.




Author Manuscript
                                       Finally, conglomerate constructs are intended to be “winning combinations” of two or more
                                       modestly to moderately related constructs. For example, the popular construct grit, defined
                                       as “perseverance and passion for long-term goals” (Duckworth, Peterson, Matthews, &
                                       Kelly, 2007, p. 1087) was intended to predict success in domains as variant as the National
                                       Spelling Bee and West Point. A recent meta-analysis, however, found that its perseverance
                                       facet better predicted success than the construct as a whole (Credé, Tynan, & Harms, 2017),
                                       thus challenging the theoretical basis of the construct. More generally, conglomerate
                                       constructs rarely fulfill their enticing premise that the total is greater than the sum of its
                                       parts. If development of such a construct is pursued, the burden of proof is on the developer
                                       to show that the conglomerate is superior to the linear combination of its components.

                                       We stress here that we are not suggesting that one should seek to eliminate these types of




Author Manuscript
                                       constructs from one’s measurement model and strive for all scales to mark a single factor
                                       clearly. On the contrary, orphan and interstitial constructs—with low and cross-loadings,
                                       respectively—are particularly important for providing a full characterization and
                                       understanding of hierarchical structures of personality and psychopathology. We aim rather
                                       to alert structural researchers to the fact that this variance also should be recognized and
                                       appropriately modeled.

                                       Broader implications of hierarchical models.: The emergence of hierarchical models has
                                       led to the important recognition that scales—even highly homogeneous ones—contain
                                       multiple sources of variance that reflect different hierarchical levels. For example, a well-
                                       designed assertiveness scale contains not only construct-specific variance reflecting stable
                                       individual differences in this lower order trait, but also includes shared variance with other




Author Manuscript
                                       lower order components of extraversion (e.g., gregariousness and positive emotionality;
                                       Watson, Stasik, Ellickson-Larew, & Stanton, 2015), which reflects the higher order construct
                                       of extraversion. Thus, a lower order scale simultaneously contains both unique (lower order
                                       facet) and shared (higher order trait) components. Multivariate techniques such as multiple
                                       regression (e.g., Watson, Clark, Chmielewski, & Kotov, 2013) and bifactor analysis (e.g.,
                                       Mansolf & Reise, 2016) can be used to isolate the specific influences of these different
                                       elements.



                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                                              Page 6


                                         It is less widely recognized that items also simultaneously contain multiple sources of




Author Manuscript
                                         variance reflecting different levels of the hierarchy in which they are embedded. We
                                         illustrate this point using data from a large sample (N = 8,305) that includes patients, adults,
                                         postpartum women, and college students (Watson et al., 2013, Study 1). All participants
                                         completed the Inventory of Depression and Anxiety Symptoms (IDAS; Watson et al., 2007).

                                         We focus on the IDAS item I woke up much earlier than usual. At its most specific level, this
                                         item can be viewed as an indicator of the construct of terminal insomnia/ early morning
                                         awakening: It correlates strongly with another terminal-insomnia item (r = .65 with I woke
                                         up early and could not get back to sleep) and could be used to create a very narrow measure
                                         of this construct. However, this item also correlates moderately (rs = .34 to .45; see the upper
                                         portion of Table 1) with items assessing other types of insomnia and could be combined with
                                         those items to create a unidimensional measure of insomnia: We subjected these items to a
                                         confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) using PROC CALIS in SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute, Inc.,




Author Manuscript
                                         2013) to test how well a single factor modeled their intercorrelations. We used four fit
                                         indices to evaluate the model: the standardized root-mean-square residual (SRMR), root-
                                         mean-square error of approximation (RMSEA), comparative fit index (CFI), and Tucker-
                                         Lewis Index (TLI).3 A 1-factor model fit these data extremely well (CFI = .996, TLI = .988,
                                         SRMR = .013, RMSEA = .048), demonstrating that this item is a valid indicator of general
                                         insomnia.

                                         Further, this item correlates moderately (rs = .22 to .26; middle portion of Table 1) with
                                         other symptoms of major depression and could be used to create a unidimensional measure
                                         of this broader construct. A CFA of these items also indicated that a 1-factor model fit the
                                         data well (CFI = .983, TLI = .948, SRMR = .023, RMSEA = .068). Thus, this item also is a
                                         valid indicator of depression. Finally, at an even broader level of generality, this item is




Author Manuscript
                                         moderately related (all rs > .24; bottom portion of Table 1) to indicators of internalizing
                                         psychopathology and could be combined with them to create a unifactorial measure of this
                                         overarching construct. Again, a CFA of these items indicated that a 1-factor model fit the
                                         data very well (CFI =.998, TFI = .995, SRMR = .007, RMSEA = .018), showing that this
                                         item is also a valid indicator of internalizing.

                                         In theory, one could extend this analysis to establish that this item also reflects the influence
                                         of the general factor of psychopathology (Tackett et al., 2013). Consequently, structural
                                         analyses—based on different sets of indicators reflecting varying hierarchical levels—could
                                         be used to establish that the item I woke up much earlier than usual is simultaneously an
                                         indicator of (a) terminal insomnia, (b) general insomnia, (c) depression, (d) internalizing,
                                         and (e) general psychopathology. Note, moreover, that this complexity is inherent in the item




Author Manuscript
                                         itself. We could have used any number of items to illustrate this point, so these analyses
                                         strongly support the assertion that items and scales typically reflect multiple meanings and
                                         constructs, not simply a single set of inferences (Standards, p. 11). They also highlight the
                                         importance of writing and selecting items very carefully during the process of scale
                                         construction.


                       3Fit is generally considered acceptable if CFI and TLI are .90 or greater and SRMR and RMSEA are .10 or less (Finch & West, 1997;
                       Hu & Bentler, 1998); and as excellent if CFI and TLI are .95 or greater and SRMR and RMSEA are .06 or less (Hu & Bentler, 1999).


                                            Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                             Page 7


                                       Creation of an item pool.—The next step is item writing. No existing data-analytic




Author Manuscript
                                       technique can remedy item-pool deficiencies, so this is a crucial stage whose fundamental
                                       goal is to sample systematically all potentially relevant content to ensure the measure’s
                                       ultimate content validity. Loevinger (1957) offered the classic articulation of this principle:
                                       “. . .the items of the pool should be chosen so as to sample all possible contents which might
                                       comprise the putative trait according to all known alternative theories of the trait” (p. 659;
                                       emphasis in original). Two key implications of this principle are: the initial pool should be
                                       broader and more comprehensive than one’s theoretical view of the target construct and
                                       include content that ultimately will be eliminated. Simply put, psychometric analyses can
                                       identify items to drop but not missing content that should have been included; accordingly,
                                       one initially should be overinclusive.

                                       In addition, the item pool must include an adequate sample of each major content area that
                                       potentially composes the construct, because undersampled areas likely will be




Author Manuscript
                                       underrepresented in the final scale. To ensure that all aspects of a construct are assessed
                                       adequately, some test developers recommend creating formal subscales, called homogeneous
                                       item composites (Hogan, 1983) or factored homogeneous item dimensions (Comrey, 1988),
                                       to assess each content area (see Watson et al., 2007, for an example). Ideally, the number of
                                       items in each content area should be proportional to that area’s importance in the target
                                       construct, but often the theoretically ideal proportions are unknown. In general, however,
                                       broader content areas should be represented by more items than narrower ones.

                                       Many of these procedures are traditionally described as reflecting the theoretical-rational or
                                       deductive method of scale development (e.g., Burisch, 1984), but we consider them an initial
                                       step in an extensive process, not a “stand-alone” scale-development method. Loevinger
                                       (1957) emphasized that attending to content was necessary, but not sufficient; rather,




Author Manuscript
                                       empirical validation of content was critical: “If theory is fully to profit from test
                                       construction..., every item [on a scale] must be accounted for” (Loevinger, 1957, p. 657).
                                       This obviously is an ideal to be striven for, not an absolute requirement (see also Comrey,
                                       1988; and Haynes, 1995).

                                       Good scale construction is an iterative process involving several stages of item writing, each
                                       followed by conceptual and psychometric analysis that sharpen one’s understanding of the
                                       nature and structure of the target domain and may identify shortcomings in the initial item
                                       pool. For instance, factor analysis might identify subscales and also show that the initial pool
                                       contains too few items to assess one or more content domains reliably. Accordingly, new
                                       items must be written, and additional data collected and analyzed. Alternatively, analyses
                                       may suggest that the target construct’s original conceptualization is countermanded by the




Author Manuscript
                                       empirical results, requiring revision of the theoretical model, a point we develop further
                                       later.

                                       Basic principles of item writing.—In addition to sampling well, it is essential to write
                                       “good” items, and it is worth the time to consult the item-writing literature on how to do this
                                       (e.g., Angleitner & Wiggins, 1985; Comrey, 1988). We mention only a few basic principles
                                       here. Items should be simple, straightforward, and appropriate for the target population’s
                                       reading level. Avoid (1) expressions that may become dated quickly; (2) colloquialisms that


                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                             Page 8


                                       may be not be familiar across age, ethnicity, region, gender, and so forth; (3) items that




Author Manuscript
                                       virtually everyone (e.g., “Sometimes I am happier than at other times”) or no one (e.g., “I
                                       am always furious”) will endorse; and (4) complex or “double-barreled” items that assess
                                       more than one characteristic; for example, “I would never drink and drive for fear that I
                                       might be stopped by the police,” assesses both a behavior’s (non)occurrence and a putative
                                       motive. Finally, the exact phrasing of items can greatly influence the construct that is being
                                       measured. For example, the inclusion of almost any negative mood term (e.g., “I worry
                                       about...,” I am upset [or bothered or troubled] by...”) virtually guarantees a substantial
                                       neuroticism/ negative affectivity component to an item.

                       Choice of format
                                       Two dominant formats.—Currently, the two dominant response formats in personality
                                       and clinical assessment are dichotomous responding (e.g., true/false; yes/no) and Likert-type




Author Manuscript
                                       rating scales with three or more options. There are several considerations in choosing
                                       between these, but surprisingly little empirical research. Recently, however, Simms, Zelazny,
                                       Williams, and Bernstein (2019) systematically examined an agree–disagree format with
                                       response options ranging from 2 to 11, evaluating the psychometric properties and
                                       convergent validity of a well-known personality trait measure in a large undergraduate
                                       sample. Their results indicated that psychometric quality (e.g., internal consistency
                                       reliability, dependability) increased up to six response options, but the number of response
                                       options had less effect on validity than expected.

                                       Likert-type scales are used with various response formats, including frequency (e.g., “never”
                                       to “always”), degree or extent (e.g., “not at all” to “very much”), similarity (e.g., “very much
                                       like me” to “not at all like me”), and agreement (e.g., “strongly agree” to “strongly
                                       disagree”). Obviously, the nature of the response format constrains item content in an




Author Manuscript
                                       important way and vice versa (Comrey, 1988). For example, frequency formats are
                                       inappropriate if the items themselves use frequency terms (e.g., “I often lose my temper”).
                                       Whether to label all or only some response options also must be decided. Most measures
                                       label up to about six response options; beyond which they vary (e.g., only the extremes,
                                       every other response, etc.). With an odd number of response options, the middle option’s
                                       label must be considered carefully (e.g., “cannot say” confounds uncertainty with a mid-
                                       range rating such as “neither agree nor disagree”), whereas even numbers of response
                                       options force respondents to “fall on one side of the fence or the other,” which some
                                       respondents dislike. However, Simms et al. found no systematic differences between odd
                                       versus even number of response options. More research of this type is needed using a broad
                                       range of constructs (e.g., psychopathology, attitudes), samples (e.g., patients, community
                                       adults), type of response formats (i.e., extent, frequency), and so on.




Author Manuscript
                                       Less common formats.—Checklists have fallen out of favor because they are more
                                       prone to response biases (e.g., D. P. Green, Goldman, & Salovey, 1993), whereas visual
                                       analog scales—now easily scored via computer administration—are making a come-back,
                                       particularly in studies of medical problems using simple ratings of single mood terms or
                                       problem severity (e.g., pain, loudness of tinnitus). Simms et al. (2019) found them to be only
                                       slightly less reliable/ valid than numerical rating scales. Forced-choice formats, which are


                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                               Page 9


                                       largely limited to legacy measures in personality and clinical assessment, also are making a




Author Manuscript
                                       come-back in the industrial-organizational psychology literature due to advances in
                                       statistical modeling techniques that solve problems of ipsative data that previously plagued
                                       this format (e.g., Brown & Maydeu-Olivares, 2013). The advantage of this format is
                                       reduction in the effect of social desirability responding, but unfortunately, we do not have
                                       the space to do justice to these developments here.

                       Derivative versions
                                       Different versions of a measure may be needed for a range of purposes and include short
                                       forms, translations, age-group adaptations, and other-report forms (e.g., for parents,
                                       spouses). Adaptations require re-validation, but far too often this step is skipped or given
                                       short shrift. We have space only to raise briefly some key issues in derivations. When
                                       available, we refer readers to sources that provide more detailed guidance for their




Author Manuscript
                                       development.

                                       Short forms.—Smith, McCarthy, and Anderson (2000) provide an excellent summary of
                                       the many challenges in developing and validating short forms. They address the tendency to
                                       try to maintain a similar level of internal consistency (e.g., coefficient alpha) by narrowing
                                       the content, which leads into the classic attenuation paradox of psychometrics (Boyle, 1991;
                                       Loevinger, 1954): Increasing a test’s internal consistency beyond a certain point can reduce
                                       its validity relative to its initially intended interpretation(s). Specifically, by narrowing the
                                       scale content, the scope and nature of the assessed construct is itself changed; in particular, it
                                       increases item redundancy, thereby reducing the total amount of construct-related
                                       information the test provides.

                                       Broadly speaking, the central challenge in creating short forms is to maintain the level of test




Author Manuscript
                                       information while simultaneously significantly reducing scale length. Analyses based on
                                       item response theory (IRT; Reise, Ainsworth, & Haviland, 2005; Simms & Watson, 2007)
                                       can be invaluable for this purpose by providing a detailed summary of the nature of the
                                       construct-related information that each item provides, which can be used to identify a
                                       reduced set of items that yields maximal information. Thus, we strongly support the
                                       increasing use of IRT to create short forms (e.g., Carmona-Perera, Caracuel, Pérez-García,
                                       & Verdejo-García, 2015).

                                       Developing short forms also provides an opportunity to improve a measure’s psychometric
                                       properties, particularly in the case of hierarchical instruments. For example, some of the
                                       domain scores of the widely used Revised NEO Personality Inventory (NEO PI-R; Costa, &
                                       McCrae, 1992) correlate substantially with one another, which lessens their discriminant




Author Manuscript
                                       validity (e.g., Costa & McCrae, 1992, reported a −.53 correlation between Neuroticism and
                                       Conscientiousness). The measure contains six lower order facet scales to assess each
                                       domain, but in creating a short form—the NEO Five-Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI; Costa &
                                       McCrae, 1992)—the authors selected the best markers of each higher order domain, rather
                                       than sampling equally across their facets, which improved the measure’s discriminant
                                       validity. In a student sample (N = 329; Watson, Clark, & Chmielewski, 2008), the NEO-FFI




                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                            Page 10


                                       Neuroticism and Conscientiousness scales correlated significantly lower (r = −.23) than did




Author Manuscript
                                       those of the full NEO PI-R version (r = −.37).

                                       As new technologies have enabled new research methods, such as ecological momentary
                                       assessment, in which behavior is sampled multiple times over the course of several days or
                                       weeks, and as researchers increasingly investigate complex interplays of diverse factors
                                       influencing such outcomes as psychopathology or crime via multi-level modeling, the
                                       demand for very short forms—one to three items—has increased. These approaches offer
                                       important new perspectives on human behavior, but meaningful and generalizable results
                                       still depend on measures’ reliability and validity. Psychometric research is accruing on
                                       measurement relevant to these methods. For example, Soto and John (2017) reported that
                                       their 15-item extra-short form (of the 60-item Big Five Inventory-2), which has one item per
                                       facet, should be used only to derive domain and not facet scores, whereas the 30-item short
                                       form could be used to assess facets. Similarly, McCrae (2014) cautioned that, on average,




Author Manuscript
                                       only one-third of single items’ variance reflected the target construct for broad traits (e.g.,
                                       neuroticism); moreover, items may capture valid sub-facet or “nuance” variance, but little is
                                       known about the construct validity of nuances compared to domains and facets. The crucial
                                       point is that it remains incumbent on the researcher to demonstrate the validity of the
                                       inferences drawn from ultra-short form measures.

                                       Translations.—Translations into western European languages may be the “worst
                                       offenders” in terms of ignoring revalidation, in that articles often do not even indicate that
                                       study measures are translations other than by implication (e.g., stating that the data were
                                       collected in Germany). There is quite a large literature on translation validation to which we
                                       cannot do justice here, so we simply refer readers to a chapter that explicitly discusses the
                                       key issues (Geisinger, 2003) and two examples of strong translation development and




Author Manuscript
                                       validation processes (Schwartz et al., 2014; Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1984). This issue is
                                       sufficiently important that the Test Standards explicitly state that both those who develop
                                       and use translations/ adaptations are responsible for providing evidence of their construct
                                       validity (AERA, APA, & NCME, 2014; Standard 3.12).

                                       Informant versions.—There are various reasons for collecting information from
                                       individuals other than, or in addition to, target individuals: difficulty or inability in
                                       responding for themselves (e.g., individuals with dementia, McDade-Montez, Watson,
                                       O’Hara, & Denburg, 2008; or children, Putnam, Rothbart, & Gartstein, 2008); concerns
                                       about valid responding (e.g., psychopathology, Achenbach, Krukowski, Dumenci, &
                                       Ivanova, 2005), and simply to provide another perspective on the person’s behavior (e.g.,
                                       Funder, 2012).




Author Manuscript
                                       Preparing informant versions is not simply a matter of changing “I” in self-report items to
                                       “He” or “She” in informant versions, although this works for some items, particularly those
                                       with high behavioral visibility (e.g., “I/He/She get(s) into more fights than most people”).
                                       Depending on the purpose of the informant assessment, items that reflect one’s self-view
                                       (e.g., “I haven’t made much of my life”) may need to be phrased so that informants report on
                                       the target’s self-view (e.g., “She thinks she hasn’t made much of her life”) or so that they
                                       report their own perspective about the person (e.g., “He hasn’t made much of his life”).


                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                               Page 11


                                       Similarly, informants can report on items that refer to internal experience (e.g., “I sometimes




Author Manuscript
                                       feel unreal”) only if the person has talked about those experiences, so such items must
                                       reflect this fact (“She says that she sometimes feels unreal”). It also is important to note that
                                       self-informant correlations are typically modest (.20-.30) to moderate (.40-.60) for a wide
                                       variety of reasons (see Achenbach et al., 2005; De Los Reyes et al., 2015; and Connelly &
                                       Ones, 2010 for meta-analyses and discussions).

                                       Adaptations for different age groups.—Consistency of measurement across
                                       developmental periods requires measure adaptation and revalidation. Many such adaptations
                                       are extensions downward to adolescence of measures developed for adults (e.g., Linde,
                                       Stringer, Simms, & Clark, 2013). For children, measure adaptation and revalidation are
                                       enormously complex due to the need for (1) multi-source assessment—child self-report
                                       except in very young children, multiple informant reports (e.g., parent, teacher) that
                                       typically show low-to-moderate agreement (De Los Reyes et al., 2015), and behavioral




Author Manuscript
                                       observation—and (2) to address developmental changes in both the nature of the construct
                                       itself, and children’s levels on the construct of interest (e.g., Putnam et al., 2008). For the
                                       elderly, adaptations may or may not be needed to account for normal age-related changes.
                                       For example, if the research question is how does life satisfaction change across the life
                                       span, then adjustments for age-related change in physical health would confound the results.
                                       In contrast, when assessing psychopathology, normal-range age-related decline in physical
                                       ability needs to be considered lest it be wrongly interpreted as a psychological symptom. See
                                       Achenbach, Ivanova, and Rescorla (2017) for a research program on multicultural, multi-
                                       informant assessment of psychopathology across the lifespan.


                       Structural Validity: Item Selection and Psychometric Evaluation




Author Manuscript
                       Test-construction strategies.
                                       Choosing a test-construction or item-selection strategy should match the scale development
                                       goal and the target construct(s)’ theoretical conceptualization. Loevinger (1957) described
                                       three main conceptual models: (a) quantitative (dimensional) models that differentiate
                                       individuals with respect to degree or level of the target construct, (b) class models that seek
                                       to categorize individuals into qualitatively different groups, and (c) more complex dynamic
                                       models. However, since then, including since the publication of our previous article,
                                       considerable research has confirmed that dimensional models fit the vast majority of data
                                       best (Haslam, Holland, & Kuppens, 2012; Markon, Chmielewski, & Miller, 2011a, 2011b),
                                       so anyone considering either a class or a dynamic model should have a very well-established
                                       theoretical reason to pursue it; consequently, we do not discuss them further in this article.




Author Manuscript
                                       Loevinger (1957) championed the concept of structural validity (see also Messick, 1995)—
                                       that a scale’s internal structure (i.e., interitem correlations) should parallel the external
                                       structure of the target trait (i.e., correlations among non-test manifestations of the trait), and
                                       that items should reflect the underlying (latent) trait variance. These concerns parallel the
                                       three main item-selection strategies for dimensional constructs: empirical (primarily
                                       concerned with nontest manifestations), internal consistency (concerned with interitem
                                       structure), and item response theory (focused on latent traits). These methods are not



                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                             Page 12


                                       mutually exclusive and typically should be used in conjunction with one another: structural




Author Manuscript
                                       validity encompasses all three.

                                       Criterion-based methods.—Beginning with Meehl’s (1945) “empirical manifesto,”
                                       empirically keyed test construction became the dominant scale-construction method. Due to
                                       major difficulties in cross-validation and generalization, plus the method’s inability to
                                       advance psychological theory, however, its popularity waned. The field readily embraced
                                       Cronbach and Meehl’s (1955) notion of construct validity, although a number of years
                                       passed before the widespread availability of computers facilitated a broad switch to internal
                                       consistency methods of scale construction. Today, attention to empirical correlations with
                                       non-test criteria has largely shifted to the external validation phase of test development,
                                       although there is no reason to avoid examining these relations early in scale development.
                                       One common strategy is to administer the initial item pool to both community and clinical
                                       samples, and to consider differences in items’ mean levels across the two groups as one




Author Manuscript
                                       criterion, among several, for item selection.

                                       Internal-consistency methods.—Currently, the single most widely used method for
                                       item selection is some form of internal-consistency analysis. When developing a single
                                       scale, corrected item-total correlations are used frequently to eliminate items that do not
                                       correlate strongly with the assessed construct, but factor analysis is essential when the target
                                       construct is conceptualized as part of a hierarchical structure or when multiple constructs are
                                       being developed simultaneously. We typically use exploratory factor analysis (EFA) to
                                       identify the underlying latent dimension (for a single unidimensional scale) or dimensions
                                       (for a higher order scale with lower order facets). We then use the identified dimension(s) as
                                       the basis for scale creation (e.g., Clark & Watson, 1995; Simms & Watson, 2007).




Author Manuscript
                                       Consistent with general guidelines in the broader factor-analytic literature (e.g., Comrey,
                                       1988; Fabrigar, Wegener, MacCallum & Strahan, 1999; Russell, 2002), we recommend
                                       using principal factor analysis (PFA vs. principal components analysis; PCA) as the initial
                                       extraction method (but see Cortina, 1993, for arguments favoring PCA). It also is helpful to
                                       examine both orthogonal and oblique rotations (Watson, 2012). For most purposes, we
                                       recommend eliminating items (a) with primary loadings below .35-to-.40 (for broader
                                       scales; below .45-to-.50 for narrower scales) and (b) that have similar or stronger loadings
                                       on other factors, although these guidelines may need to be relaxed in some circumstances
                                       (e.g., clinical measures in which it may be important to include low base-rate items).
                                       Resulting scales can then be refined using CFA.

                                       Factor analysis is a tool that can be used wisely or foolishly. Fortunately, the nature of factor




Author Manuscript
                                       analysis is such that blind adherence to a few simple rules typically will lead to developing a
                                       decent (though not likely optimal) scale. Even with factor analysis, there is no substitute for
                                       good theory and careful thought. For example, as noted earlier, internal consistency and
                                       breadth are countervailing, so simply retaining the strongest loading items may not yield a
                                       scale that best represents the target construct. That is, if the top-loading items are highly
                                       redundant with one another, including them all will increase internal consistency estimates
                                       but also may create an overly narrow scale that does not assess the construct optimally. This
                                       represents another illustration of the attenuation paradox we discussed previously.


                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                             Page 13


                                       Similarly, if items that reflect the theoretical core of the construct do not correlate strongly




Author Manuscript
                                       with it or with each other in preliminary analyses, it is not wise simply to eliminate them
                                       without considering why they did not behave as expected: Is the theory inadequate? Are the
                                       items poorly worded? Is the sample non-representative in some important way? Are the
                                       items’ base rates too extreme? and Are there too few items representing the core construct?

                                       Item Response Theory (IRT).—IRT (Reise et al., 2005; Reise & Waller, 2009; Simms &
                                       Watson, 2007) increasingly is being used in scale development; as noted earlier, it plays a
                                       particularly important role in short-form creation. IRT is based on the assumption that item
                                       responses reflect levels of an underlying construct and, moreover, that each item’s response-
                                       trait relation can be described by a monotonically increasing function called an item
                                       characteristic curve (ICC). Individuals with higher levels of the trait have greater expected
                                       probabilities for answering the item in a keyed direction (e.g., highly extraverted individuals
                                       are more likely to endorse an item about frequent partying). ICCs provide the precise values




Author Manuscript
                                       (within a standard error range) of these probabilities across the entire range of trait levels.

                                       In using IRT, the emphasis is on identifying the specific items that are maximally
                                       informative for each individual, given his or her level of the underlying dimension. For
                                       instance, a challenging algebra problem may provide useful information for respondents
                                       with a high level of mathematical ability (who may or may not be able to get it correct), but
                                       it is uninformative when given to individuals with little mathematical facility, because we
                                       know in advance that they almost surely will get it wrong. From an IRT perspective, the
                                       optimal item is one that a respondent has a 50% probability of answering correctly or
                                       endorsing in the keyed direction, because this provides the greatest increment in trait-
                                       relevant information for that person.




Author Manuscript
                                       Within the IRT literature, a model with parameters for item difficulty and item
                                       discrimination is used most frequently (Reise & Waller, 2009; Simms & Watson, 2007).
                                       Item difficulty is the point along the underlying continuum at which an item has a 50%
                                       probability of being answered correctly (or endorsed in the keyed direction) across all
                                       respondents. Items with high (vs. low) difficulty values reflect higher (vs. lower) trait levels
                                       and have low (vs. high) correct-response/ endorsement probabilities. Discrimination reflects
                                       the degree of psychometric precision, or information, that an item provides across difficulty
                                       levels.

                                       IRT offers two important advantages over other item-selection strategies. First, it enables
                                       specification of the trait level at which each item is maximally informative. This information
                                       can then be used to identify a set of items that yield precise, reliable, and valid assessment
                                       across the entire range of the trait. Thus, IRT methods offer an enhanced ability to




Author Manuscript
                                       discriminate among individuals at the extremes of trait distributions (e.g., both among those
                                       very high and very low in extraversion). Second, IRT methods allow estimation of each
                                       individual’s trait level without administering a fixed set of items. This flexibility permits the
                                       development of computer-adaptive tests (CATs) in which assessment focuses primarily on
                                       the subset of items that are maximally informative for each respondent (e.g., difficult items
                                       for quantitatively gifted individuals, easier items for those low in mathematical ability).
                                       CATs are extremely efficient and provide roughly equivalent trait-relevant information using


                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                             Page 14


                                       fewer items than conventional measures (typical item reductions are ≥ 50%; Reise & Waller,




Author Manuscript
                                       2009; Rudick, Yam, & Simms, 2013).

                                       As a scale development technique, IRT’s main limitation is that it requires a good working
                                       knowledge of the basic underlying trait(s) to be modeled (i.e., that one’s measurement model
                                       be reasonably well established). Consequently, IRT methods are most useful in domains in
                                       which the basic constructs are well understood and less helpful when the underlying
                                       structure is unclear. Thus, EFA remains the method of choice during the early, investigative
                                       stages of assessment within a domain. Once the basic factors/scales/constructs within the
                                       domain have been established, they can be refined further using analytic approaches such as
                                       CFA and IRT.

                                       It also is more challenging to develop multiple scales simultaneously in IRT than using
                                       techniques such as EFA. Consequently, IRT-based scales frequently are developed in




Author Manuscript
                                       isolation from one another, with insufficient attention paid to discriminant validity. For
                                       example, Pilkonis et al. (2011) describe the development of brief, IRT-based anxiety and
                                       depression scales. Although these scales display some exemplary qualities and compare
                                       favorably in many ways to more traditional indicators of these constructs, the depression and
                                       anxiety trait scores correlated .81 with one another (Pilkonis et al., 2011). Similarly, they
                                       correlated .79 in a sample of 448 Mechanical Turk (MTurk) workers (Watson, Stanton, &
                                       Clark, 2017). This example illustrates the importance of developing scales simultaneously—
                                       using techniques such as EFA—to maximize measures’ discriminant validity.

                       Initial data collection.
                                       In this section, “initial” does not include pilot testing, which can be helpful to conduct on
                                       moderately sized samples of convenience (e.g., 100–200 college students or an MTurk




Author Manuscript
                                       sample) to test item formats, ensure that links to online surveys work, and so on.

                                       Sample considerations.—Basic item-content decisions that will shape the scale’s
                                       empirical and conceptual development are made after the first full round of data collection.
                                       Therefore, it is very important to use at least one, and preferably two or three, large,
                                       reasonably heterogeneous sample(s). Based on evidence regarding the stability and
                                       replicability of structural analyses (Guadagnoli & Velicer, 1988; MacCallum, Widaman,
                                       Zhang, & Hong, 1999), we recommend a minimum of 300 respondents per (sub)sample,
                                       including students, community adults (e.g., MTurk), and, ideally, a sample specifically
                                       representing the target population. If that is not feasible (which is not uncommon for
                                       financial reasons), then at least one sample should include individuals who share a key
                                       attribute with the target population. For example, if the measure is to be used in a clinical




Author Manuscript
                                       setting, then consider using an analog sample (e.g., college students or MTurk workers) who
                                       score above a given cut point on a psychopathology screening scale.

                                       As we discuss below, the reason that it is critical to obtain such data early on is that the
                                       target construct and its items may have rather different properties in such samples compared
                                       to college-student or community-adult samples. If this is not discovered until late in the
                                       development process, the scale’s utility may be seriously compromised.



                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                                                    Page 15


                                          Inclusion of comparison (anchor) scales.—In the initial round of data collection, it is




Author Manuscript
                                          common practice to administer the preliminary item pool without additional items or scales.
                                          This practice is regrettable, however, because it does not permit examination of the target
                                          construct’s boundaries, which is critical to understanding the construct from both theoretical
                                          and empirical viewpoints. Just as the initial literature review permits identification of
                                          existing scales and concepts that may help establish the measure’s convergent and
                                          discriminant validity, marker scales assessing these other constructs should be included in
                                          the initial data collection to begin to test these hypotheses. Too often, test developers
                                          belatedly discover that their new scale correlates too strongly with an established measure
                                          or, worse, with one of a theoretically distinct construct.

                                          Scale co-development.—As our knowledge of the hierarchical structure of personality
                                          and psychopathology has grown, paying attention to where a construct fits within a
                                          particular structure has become important enough that in most cases, new scales should not




Author Manuscript
                                          be developed in isolation, but rather “co-developed” with the express intent of considering
                                          their convergent and discriminant validity as part of the initial scale-development process.
                                          Note that single scales with subscales are special examples of hierarchical structures, so the
                                          various principles we discuss here are relevant to such cases as well; we specifically address
                                          subscales subsequently.

                                          When co-developing scales for constructs conceptualized as fitting within a hierarchical
                                          structure, there are several issues to consider initially, the most important of which are (a)
                                          whether the primary focus of scale development is on the lower order constructs, the higher
                                          order constructs, or both; and (b) how extensive a portion of the hierarchical structure the
                                          scale-development project targets. For example, in developing the SNAP (Clark et al., 2014),
                                          the focus was on lower order scales relevant to personality pathology which, accordingly,




Author Manuscript
                                          were developed without regard to how they loaded on higher order dimensions. In contrast,
                                          in developing the Faceted Inventory of the Five-Factor Model (FI-FFM; Watson Nus, & Wu,
                                          2019), the focus was equally on the higher and lower order dimensions, so scales that either
                                          cross-loaded on two or more higher order dimensions or did not load strongly on any higher
                                          order dimension were not included in the final instrument.4

                                          In developing the Personality Inventory for DSM-5 (PID-5; Krueger, Derringer, Markon,
                                          Watson, & Skodol, 2012), the facets of the five hypothesized domains were initially created
                                          individually. Then, exploratory factor analyses (EFA) were run on all items within each
                                          domain, extracting factors up to one more than the number of each domain’s hypothesized
                                          facets, and selecting the EFA with the best fit to the data for each domain. In several cases,
                                          several facets were collapsed into one scale because their respective items formed a single




Author Manuscript
                                          factor. In other cases, items were moved from one facet to another. Less than half the facets
                                          “survived” these analyses more-or-less intact; in the most extreme case, five facets merged
                                          into one.




                       4Note that the former and latter approaches facilitate and eschew, respectively, including orphan and interstitial constructs, which we
                       discussed earlier.


                                             Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                            Page 16


                                       However, even this level of attention proved to be insufficient. A scale-level EFA with




Author Manuscript
                                       oblique rotation found significant cross-factor loadings for 11 (44%) of the PID-5’s 25
                                       facets, and subsequent studies have established that the measure would have benefitted from
                                       additional examination of discriminant validity across domains. Crego, Gore, Rojas, and
                                       Widiger (2015) provided a brief review of such studies and reported that in their own data,
                                       five PID-5 facets (20%) had higher average discriminant (cross-domain) than convergent
                                       (within-domain) correlations. In the Improving the Measurement of Personality Project
                                       (IMPP), with a mixed sample of 305 outpatients and 302 community adults screened to be at
                                       high risk for personality pathology, we replicated those results for four of these five facets
                                       (Clark, 2018). Of course, it may be that, although conceptualized initially as facets of a
                                       particular domain, these traits actually are interstitial and thus should have high cross-
                                       loadings. Our point here is not to set the bar for scale development prohibitively high, but to
                                       raise attention to important issues such as paying careful attention to expected and observed




Author Manuscript
                                       convergent and discriminant validity, so as to maximize the outcomes of scale development
                                       projects and increase the likelihood that new scales will make important contributions to the
                                       psychological literature.

                                       Subscales.—A special case of co-development is that of hierarchically multidimensional
                                       scales, commonly called measures with subscales. These measures are unidimensional at
                                       their higher order level, with correlated subfactors at their lower order level. Factor analysis
                                       of the items comprising a hierarchically multidimensional construct yields a strong general
                                       factor, with all or almost all items loading strongly on this factor; nonetheless, when
                                       additional factors are extracted, clear—yet correlated—lower order dimensions emerge. For
                                       example, two subscales constitute the SNAP-2 Self-harm scale—Suicide Potential and Low
                                       Self-esteem (Clark et al., 2014)—the former composed of item content directly concerned
                                       with suicide and self-harming thoughts, feelings, and behaviors, and the latter composed of




Author Manuscript
                                       items expressing self-derogation versus self-satisfaction. In the IMPP sample, all 16 items
                                       loaded most strongly on the first general factor (M loading = .52, range = .41 to .66), yet
                                       when two varimax-rotated factors were extracted, the two subscales’ items loaded cleanly on
                                       the two factors, with mean loadings of .57 and .17 on their primary and non-primary factors,
                                       respectively (Clark, 2017); unit-weighted subscales constructed from the two subsets of
                                       items correlated .48. Any hierarchically dimensional scale (i.e., any measure with subscales)
                                       should have similar properties.

                       Psychometric evaluation: An iterative process.
                                       We return here to an earlier point: Good scale construction is an iterative process involving
                                       an initial cycle of preliminary measure development, data collection, and psychometric
                                       evaluation, followed by at least one additional cycle of revision of both measure and




Author Manuscript
                                       construct, data collection, psychometric evaluation, revision. . .. The most often neglected
                                       aspect of this process is revision of the target construct’s conceptualization. Too often, scale
                                       developers assume that their initial conceptualization is entirely correct, considering only the
                                       measure as open to revision. However, it is critical to remain open to rethinking one’s initial
                                       construct—to “listen to the data” not “make the data talk.”




                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                            Page 17


                                       Often this involves only slight tweaking, but it may involve more fundamental




Author Manuscript
                                       reconceptualization. For example, the Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire (Tellegen
                                       & Waller, 2008) originally had a single, bipolar, trait-affect scale, but ended with nearly
                                       orthogonal negative and positive emotionality scales. The SNAP-2 Self-harm scale provides
                                       a converse example. Initially two scales, Low Self-esteem (originally Self-derogation) and
                                       Suicide Proneness were developed independently. However, across repeated rounds of data
                                       collection in diverse samples, the scales correlated highly and yielded a single dimension
                                       with two lower order facets, so they were combined to form a Self-harm scale, with two
                                       subscales. This necessitated reconceptualization of the combined item set as single construct
                                       with two strongly correlated item-content subsets. Research on self-injurers provided an
                                       initial basis for this reconceptualization: Glenn, Michel, Franklin, Hooley, and Nock (2014)
                                       found that the relation between self-injury and experimentally tested pain analgesia was
                                       mediated by self-criticalness and hypothesized “the tendency to experience self-critical




Author Manuscript
                                       thoughts in response to stressful events . . . increases the likelihood of both self-injury and
                                       pain analgesia” (p. 921). A full reconceptualization lies in the future, but the convergence of
                                       findings from independently conducted self-injury research and psychometric scale
                                       evaluation is evidence supporting both.

                                       Analysis of item distributions.—Before conducting more complex structural analyses,
                                       scale developers should examine individual items’ response distributions. Two
                                       considerations are paramount: First, it is important to consider eliminating items that have
                                       highly skewed and unbalanced distributions. In a true/false format, these are items that
                                       virtually everyone (e.g., 95% or more) either endorses or denies; with a Likert-rating format,
                                       these are items to which almost all respondents respond similarly (e.g., “slightly agree”).
                                       Highly unbalanced items are undesirable for several reasons: (1) When most respondents
                                       answer similarly, items convey very little information, except perhaps at extremes of the trait




Author Manuscript
                                       distribution; (2) relatedly, items with limited variability are likely to correlate weakly with
                                       other items, and therefore will fare poorly in structural analyses; and (3) items with
                                       extremely unbalanced distributions can produce highly unstable correlational results (see
                                       Clark & Watson, 1995, for an example from Comrey, 1988).

                                       Importantly, only items with unbalanced distributions across diverse samples representing
                                       the full range of the scale’s target population should be eliminated. As mentioned earlier,
                                       many items show very different response distributions across clinical and nonclinical
                                       samples. For instance, the item “I have things in my possession that I can’t explain how I
                                       got” likely would be endorsed by very few undergraduates, whereas in an appropriate patient
                                       sample, it may have a much higher endorsement rate and prove useful in assessing clinically
                                       significant levels of dissociative pathology. Thus, it may be desirable to retain items that




Author Manuscript
                                       assess important construct-relevant information in a sample more like the target population,
                                       even if they have extremely unbalanced distributions and, therefore, relatively poor
                                       psychometric properties in others.

                                       The second consideration is that it is desirable to retain items with a broad range of
                                       distributions. In the case of true/false and Likert-type items, respectively, this means keeping
                                       items with widely varying endorsement percentages and means (in IRT terms, items with
                                       widely varying difficulty parameters), because most constructs represent continuously


                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                           Page 18


                                       distributed dimensions, such that scores can occur across the entire dimension. Thus, it is




Author Manuscript
                                       important to retain items that discriminate at many different points along the continuum
                                       (e.g., at mild, moderate, and extreme levels). Returning to the earlier example, “I have things
                                       in my possession that I can’t explain how I got” may be useful precisely because it serves to
                                       define the extreme upper-end of the dissociative continuum (i.e., those who suffer from
                                       dissociative identity disorder).

                                       As noted earlier, a key advantage of IRT (Reise et al., 2005; Reise & Waller, 2009) is that it
                                       yields parameter estimates that specify the point along a continuum at which a given item is
                                       maximally informative. These estimates can be used to choose an efficient set of items that
                                       yield precise assessment across the entire range of the continuum, which naturally leads to
                                       retaining items with widely varying distributions.

                                       Unidimensionality, internal consistency, and coefficient alpha.—The next stage is




Author Manuscript
                                       to determine which items to eliminate or retain in the item pool via structural analyses. This
                                       is most critical when seeking to create a theoretically based measure of a target construct, so
                                       that the goal is to measure one thing (i.e., the target construct)—and only this thing—as
                                       precisely as possible. This goal may seem relatively straightforward, but it remains poorly
                                       understood by test developers and users. The most obvious problem is the widespread
                                       misapprehension that this goal can be attained simply by demonstrating an “acceptable”
                                       level of internal consistency reliability, typically as estimated by coefficient alpha
                                       (Cronbach, 1951). A further complication is that recommendations regarding .80 as
                                       “acceptable” level of internal consistency for basic research (e.g., Nunnally, 1978; Streiner,
                                       2003) are widely ignored, such that characterizations of coefficient alphas in the .60s and .
                                       70s as “good” or “adequate” are far too common.




Author Manuscript
                                       More fundamentally, psychometricians long have disavowed using reliability indexes to
                                       establish scales’ homogeneity (see Boyle, 1991; Cortina, 1993). To understand why this is
                                       so, we must distinguish between internal consistency and homogeneity or unidimensionality.
                                       “Internal consistency” refers to the overall degree to which a scale’s items are
                                       intercorrelated, whereas “homogeneity” and “unidimensionality” indicate whether or not the
                                       scale items assess a single underlying factor or construct (Briggs & Cheek, 1986; Cortina,
                                       1993). Thus, internal consistency is a necessary but not sufficient condition for homogeneity
                                       or unidimensionality. In other words, a scale cannot be homogeneous unless all of its items
                                       are interrelated. Because theory-driven assessment seeks to measure a single construct
                                       systematically, the test developer ultimately is pursuing the goal of homogeneity or
                                       unidimensionality, not internal consistency per se.

                                       Unfortunately, KR-20 and coefficient alpha are measures of internal consistency, not




Author Manuscript
                                       homogeneity, and so are of limited utility in establishing the unidimensionality of a scale.
                                       Furthermore, they are even ambiguous and imperfect indicators of internal consistency,
                                       because they essentially are a function of two parameters: scale length and the average
                                       interitem correlation (AIC; Cortina, 1993; Cronbach, 1951). Thus, one can achieve a high
                                       internal consistency reliability estimate with many moderately correlated items, a small
                                       number of highly intercorrelated items, or various combinations of scale length and AIC.
                                       Whereas AIC is a straightforward indicator of internal consistency, scale length is entirely


                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                              Page 19


                                       irrelevant. In fact, with a large number of items, it is exceedingly difficult to avoid having a




Author Manuscript
                                       high reliability estimate, so coefficient alpha is virtually useless for scales containing 40 or
                                       more items (Cortina, 1993).

                                       Accordingly, the AIC is a much more useful index than coefficient alpha, and test developers
                                       should work toward a target AIC, rather than a particular level of alpha. As a more specific
                                       guideline, we recommend that the AIC fall in the range of .15 to .50 (see Briggs & Cheek,
                                       1986), with the scale’s optimal value determined by the generality versus specificity of the
                                       target construct. For a broad higher order construct such as extraversion, a mean correlation
                                       as low as .15-.20 may be desirable; by contrast, for a valid measure of a narrower construct
                                       such as talkativeness, a much higher mean intercorrelation (e.g., in the .40-to-.50 range) is
                                       needed.

                                       As suggested earlier, however, even the AIC cannot alone establish the unidimensionality of




Author Manuscript
                                       a scale; in fact, a multidimensional scale actually can have an “acceptable” AIC: Cortina
                                       (1993, Table 2) artificially constructed an 18-item scale composed of two distinct 9-item
                                       groups. The items within each cluster had an AIC of .50. However, the two clusters were
                                       uncorrelated. Obviously, the full scale was not unidimensional, instead reflecting two
                                       completely independent dimensions; nevertheless, it had a coefficient alpha of .85 and a
                                       moderate AIC (.24).

                                       This example clearly illustrates that one can achieve a seemingly satisfactory AIC by
                                       averaging many higher coefficients with many lower ones. Thus, unidimensionality cannot
                                       be ensured simply by focusing on the average interitem correlation; rather, it is necessary to
                                       examine the range and distribution of these correlations as well. Consequently, we must
                                       amend our earlier guideline to state that not only the AIC, but virtually all of the individual




Author Manuscript
                                       interitem correlations also should fall somewhere in the .15 to .50 range to ensure
                                       unidimensionality. Ideally, almost all of the interitem correlations would be moderate in
                                       magnitude and cluster narrowly around the mean value. B. F. Green (1978) articulated this
                                       principle most eloquently, stating that to assess a broad construct, the item intercorrelation
                                       matrix should appear as “a calm but insistent sea of small, highly similar correlations” (pp.
                                       665–666).

                                       Cross-validation.—If our previous recommendations have been followed, this section
                                       would hardly be necessary, because we advise testing the item pool and resultant scales in
                                       multiple samples from essentially the beginning of the process. Cross-validation has been
                                       made much easier by the existence of crowdsourcing platforms such as MTurk, and it
                                       appears that most scale-development articles published these days in top-line journals such
                                       as Psychological Assessment, include a cross-validation sample. However, we easily were




Author Manuscript
                                       able to identify some that did not, even among articles new enough to be in the “Online
                                       First” publication stage.

                                       Loevinger split the structural and external stages at the point wherein the focus moves from
                                       items to total scores. We follow her lead and shift now to the external phase of development.




                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                              Page 20


                       External Validity: An Ongoing Process




Author Manuscript
                                       We have emphasized the iterative process of scale development. Phrased in its most extreme
                                       form, scale development ends only when a measure is “retired” because, due to increased
                                       knowledge, it is better to develop a new measure of a revised construct than to modify an
                                       existing measure. That said, when it has been established that measures have strong
                                       psychometric properties relative to their respective target constructs, evaluation shifts to
                                       focusing on placement in their immediate and broader nomological net (Cronbach & Meehl,
                                       1955). As our focus is primarily on scale development, we cover only a few important
                                       aspects of this stage. We refer readers to Smith and McCarthy (1995), who describe the later
                                       “refinement” stages of scale development in some detail.

                                       First, however, it is important to note that the quality of the initial scale-development stages
                                       has clear ramifications for external validity. If the concept is clearly conceptualized and




Author Manuscript
                                       delineated, its “rival” constructs and target criteria will also be clearer. If the original item
                                       pool included a widely relevant range of content, the scale’s range of clinical utility will be
                                       more clearly defined. If the measure was constructed with a focus on unidimensionality (vs.
                                       internal consistency), the scale will identify a more homogeneous clinical group, rather than
                                       a more heterogeneous one requiring further demarcation. Finally, if convergent and
                                       discriminant validity have been considered from the outset, it will be far easier to delineate
                                       the construct boundaries and achieve the important goal of knowing exactly what the scale
                                       measures and what it does not.

                       Convergent and discriminant validity.
                                       According to the Test Standards, “Relationships between test scores and other measures
                                       intended to assess the same or similar constructs provide convergent evidence, whereas




Author Manuscript
                                       relationships between measures purportedly of different constructs provide discriminant
                                       evidence” (AERA, APA, & NCME, 2014, pp. 16–17). Inclusion of “similar constructs” in
                                       this definition creates an unfortunate gray area in which it is unclear whether a construct is
                                       similar enough to provide convergent—as opposed to discriminant—evidence. It is clearer
                                       simply to state that convergent validity is assessed by examining relations among purported
                                       indicators of the same construct. Using Campbell and Fiske’s (1959) terminology,
                                       convergent evidence is established by examining monotrait correlations.

                                       Campbell and Fiske (1959) argue that convergent correlations “should be significantly
                                       different from zero and sufficiently large to encourage further examination of validity” (p.
                                       82). Unfortunately, what “sufficiently large” means in this context cannot be answered
                                       simply because the expected magnitude of these correlations will vary dramatically as a




Author Manuscript
                                       function of various design features. The single most important factor is the nature of the
                                       different methods that are used to examine convergent validity. In their original formulation,
                                       Campbell and Fiske (1959) largely assumed that investigators would examine convergence
                                       across fundamentally different methods. For example, in one analysis (their Table 2), they
                                       examined the associations between trait scores assessed using (a) peer ratings versus (b) a
                                       word association task.




                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                              Page 21


                                       Over time, investigators began to interpret the concept of “method” much more loosely, for




Author Manuscript
                                       example, offering correlations among different self-report measures of the same target
                                       construct to establish convergent validity (e.g., Watson et al., 2019; Watson et al., 2007).
                                       This practice is not problematic, but obviously is very different from what Campbell and
                                       Fiske (1959) envisioned. Most notably, convergent correlations will be—and should be—
                                       substantially higher when they are computed within the same basic method (e.g., between
                                       different self-report measures of neuroticism) than when they are calculated across very
                                       different methods (e.g., between self- vs. informant-rated neuroticism). This, in turn, means
                                       that the same level of convergence might support construct validity in one context, but
                                       challenge it in another. For instance, it would be difficult to argue that a .45 correlation
                                       between two self-report measures of self-esteem reflects adequate convergent validity, but
                                       the same correlation between self- and parent-ratings of self-esteem might do so.

                                       Discriminant validity involves examining how a measure relates to purported indicators of




Author Manuscript
                                       other constructs (i.e., heterotrait correlations). Discriminant validity is particularly important
                                       in establishing that highly correlated constructs within hierarchical models are, in fact,
                                       empirically distinct from one another (see, for example, Watson & Clark, 1992; Watson et
                                       al., 2019). Indeed, the most interesting tests of discriminant validity involve near-neighbor
                                       constructs that are known to be strongly related to one another (Watson, 2012).

                                       Campbell and Fiske (1959) state that discriminant validity is established by demonstrating
                                       that convergent correlations are higher than discriminant coefficients. For instance, self-rated
                                       self-esteem should correlate more strongly with peer-rated self-esteem than with peer-rated
                                       extraversion. One complication, however, is that the meaning of the word “higher” is
                                       ambiguous in this context. Many researchers interpret it rather loosely to mean simply that
                                       the convergent correlation must be descriptively higher than the discriminant correlations to




Author Manuscript
                                       which it is compared. For instance, if the convergent correlation is .50, and the highest
                                       discriminant correlation is only .45, then it is assumed that this requirement is met.

                                       It is better to use the more stringent requirement that the convergent correlation should be
                                       significantly higher than the discriminant coefficients to which it is compared, which
                                       obviously is more difficult to meet. Perhaps most importantly, it also requires relatively large
                                       sample sizes (typically, at least 200 observations) to have sufficient statistical power to
                                       conduct these tests in a meaningful way. Nevertheless, the payoff is well worth it in terms of
                                       the greater precision of the validity analyses. For instance, Watson et al. (2008) examined
                                       the convergent and discriminant validity of the 11 non-overlapping IDAS scales in a sample
                                       of 605 outpatients. The convergent correlations ranged from .52 to .71, with a mean value
                                       of .62. Significance tests further revealed that these convergent correlations exceeded the




Author Manuscript
                                       discriminant coefficients in 219 of 220 comparisons (99.5%). These results thereby provide
                                       substantial evidence of discriminant validity.

                       Criterion validity.
                                       Criterion validity is established by demonstrating that a test is significantly related to
                                       theoretically relevant non-test outcomes (e.g., clinical diagnoses, arrest records). Although
                                       criterion keying is no longer widely used as a scale-development method, demonstrating
                                       criterion validity remains an important part of construct validation. The choice of criteria


                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                            Page 22


                                       represents a very important aspect of examining criterion validity. Specifically, it is




Author Manuscript
                                       important to put the construct to what Meehl (1978) called a “risky test” (p. 818), one that
                                       provides strong support for the construct if it passes. It is not uncommon for developers of a
                                       measure of some aspect of psychopathology to claim criterion validity based on finding
                                       significant differences between scores on the measure in target-patient and non-patient
                                       samples. This is not a risky test; for example, it would be far better to show that the measure
                                       differentiated a particular target-patient group from other types of patients.

                       Incremental validity.
                                       Criterion validity also involves the related concept of incremental validity. Incremental
                                       validity is established by demonstrating that a measure adds significantly to the prediction of
                                       a criterion over and above what can be predicted by other sources of data (Hunsley & Meyer,
                                       2003). Ensuring that a scale is sufficiently distinct from well-established constructs that it




Author Manuscript
                                       has significant incremental validity for predicting important external variables is a crucial
                                       issue that often is given too little consideration.

                                       Three interrelated issues are important when considering incremental validity. They also are
                                       related to discriminant validity, so we discuss them together. The first issue is what variables
                                       to use to test incremental validity—most notably, what are its competing predictors, and also
                                       what criterion is being predicted. The second is intertwined with where a measure fits within
                                       an established hierarchical structure; a full understanding of a new measure’s incremental
                                       validity requires comparison with other measures at the same level of abstraction. The third
                                       is how much incremental validity is enough, which affects interpretation of findings and the
                                       new measure’s value to the field. When considering incremental and discriminant validity, it
                                       again is important to put the construct to a “risky test” (Meehl, 1978). For incremental
                                       validity, this means adding significant predictive power to a known, strong correlate of the




Author Manuscript
                                       criterion, whereas for discriminant validity, this means showing independence from variables
                                       that one might expect would be correlated with the new measure. The biggest challenge,
                                       therefore, is to demonstrate discriminant and incremental validity for a new measure of an
                                       established construct.

                                       We again use grit (Duckworth et al., 2007) to illustrate. In both its seminal article and that
                                       introducing its short form (Duckworth & Quinn, 2009), grit’s developers acknowledged that
                                       conscientiousness (C) was highly correlated with grit (r = ~.70-.75). Conscientiousness was
                                       thus a strongly competing predictor, raising concerns about both incremental and
                                       discriminant validity; nonetheless, grit showed incremental validity over C in two studies of
                                       relevant criteria. However, although Duckworth and Quinn (2009) acknowledge that grit
                                       might not outpredict C’s facets, they did not examine this question empirically.




Author Manuscript
                                       Subsequently, MacCann and Roberts (2010) reported that grit had no incremental validity
                                       over eight C facets for predicting a number of relevant variables. Moreover, meta-analytic
                                       results (Credé, Tynan, & Harms, 2017) indicated that grit had insufficient discriminant
                                       validity and “was simply a different manifestation of conscientiousness” (p. 12). These
                                       results reinforce the importance of considering which level of an established hierarchy
                                       provides the “riskier” test of incremental validity; such tests also serve to determine where a
                                       new construct fits best within that hierarchy.



                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                            Page 23


                                       Watson et al. (2019) provide a good recent example of “risky” tests of incremental validity




Author Manuscript
                                       involving the FI-FFM neuroticism facet scales. The authors first presented convergent and
                                       discriminant validity analyses to establish that some scales assessed the same trait
                                       dimensions as scales in the NEO Personality Inventory-3 (NEO-PI-3; McCrae, Costa, &
                                       Martin, 2005), whereas others did not. They then reported incremental-validity analyses
                                       wherein they showed that the two FI-FFM scales assessing novel traits—Somatic
                                       Complaints and Envy—added significantly to the prediction of various criteria (e.g., anxiety
                                       and depressive disorder diagnoses, measures of health anxiety and hypochondriasis) over
                                       and above the NEO-PI-3 facets.

                                       Finally, the issue of whether a construct has sufficient incremental validity for predicting
                                       relevant constructs has no simple answer. Rather, it depends on the purpose and scope of
                                       prediction and ultimately reduces to a type of cost-benefit analysis. For example, in
                                       epidemiological studies, relatively weak predictors with small but significant incremental




Author Manuscript
                                       validity (e.g., 2–3%) may lead to public-health-policy recommendations that, if followed,
                                       could save thousands of lives. Thus, in medicine, statistics such as “number needed to treat”
                                       (NNT; a prediction of the number of additional people who would need to be treated to
                                       affect one of them) have been developed. But whether 10 or 100 is a small enough number
                                       to warrant treating more people depends on the cost of the treatment, the amount of harm
                                       caused by not treating, and the degree of benefit to those treated successfully. For a low-cost
                                       treatment with great harm for not treating and great benefit for successful treatment (e.g., a
                                       cheap vaccine for a usually fatal illness), a very large NNT might still be small enough.
                                       Conversely, for a very expensive treatment with modest harm and benefit (e.g., an
                                       experimental treatment that only slightly prolongs life), respectively, a very small NNT
                                       would be more appropriate. Use of such statistics in psychological research would help to
                                       clarify evaluating new measures’ incremental validity.




Author Manuscript
                       Cross-method analyses.
                                       The utility of obtaining information from multiple sources is increasingly being recognized,
                                       and research related to the issues that arise when diverse sources provide discrepant
                                       information also is growing, but the topic still remains relatively understudied. Earlier, we
                                       discussed informant reports, and we do not have much additional space to devote to the
                                       broader topic of cross-method analyses, so we simply bring a few issues to readers’
                                       attention.

                                       Self-report questionnaires versus interviews.—Self-ratings often are denigrated
                                       unfairly as “just self-report,” whereas, for many psychological phenomena, self-report is the
                                       best—or even the only—appropriate method. For example, no one knows how a person is




Author Manuscript
                                       feeling or how much something hurts other than that person, but inherent in this strength are
                                       self-report’s greatest limitations: Because N always = 1 for information regarding an
                                       individual’s internal sensations, no other method is available to verify such self-reports, even
                                       though (1) individuals may not report on their internal thoughts or feelings accurately, either
                                       because they choose not to do so (e.g., if honest reporting might lead to an adverse decision)
                                       or because they cannot (e.g., poor insight, memory lapses, dementia); (2) individuals may
                                       interpret and use rating scales differently (e.g., “usually” may represent different subjective


                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                           Page 24


                                       frequencies across individuals; Schmidt, Le, & Ilies, 2003); and (3) individual items may be




Author Manuscript
                                       interpreted differently depending on one’s level of the trait. For example, the item “I’m often
                                       not as cautious as I should be” was intended as an indicator of impulsivity, but was endorsed
                                       positively more often by respondents lower on the trait (i.e., more cautious individuals!;
                                       Clark et al., 2014). Nonetheless, despite these limitations, self-reported information is
                                       remarkably reliable and supports valid inference most of the time.

                                       Interviews often are considered superior to self-report because (a) they involve “expert
                                       judgment” and (b) follow-up questions permit clarification of responses. However, for the
                                       most part, they are based on self-report and thus reflect the strengths and limitations of both
                                       self-report and interviewing. Perhaps the most serious limitation of interviews is that
                                       interviewers always filter interviewees’ responses through their own perspective and, as the
                                       clinical-judgment literature has shown repeatedly (e.g., Dawes, Faust, & Meehl, 2002), this
                                       typically lowers reliability and predictive validity over an empirically established method, a




Author Manuscript
                                       problem that decreases relative to the degree of structure in the interview. For example, the
                                       DSM-III field trials reported unstructured-interview-based interrater and retest reliabilities
                                       for personality disorder of .61 and .54, respectively (Spitzer, Forman, & Nee, 1979), whereas
                                       a later review based on semi-structured interviews reported these values to be .79 and .62
                                       (Zimmerman, 1994). Convergence with self-report also drops when unstructured versus
                                       semi-structured interviews are compared; for example, Clark, Livesley, and Morey (1997)
                                       reported mean correlations of .25 versus .40 and mean kappas of .08 versus .27 for these
                                       comparisons. Nonetheless, demonstrating good convergent/ discriminant validity between
                                       self-report and interview measures of constructs provides support for both methods (e.g.,
                                       Dornbach-Bender et al., 2017; Watson et al., 2008).

                                       Symptom scales versus diagnoses.—There often is a parallelism of symptom and




Author Manuscript
                                       diagnoses with self-report versus interview that is important to consider in its own right.
                                       However, we focus here only on interview-based assessment of both. Because they are more
                                       fully dimensional than dichotomous diagnoses, symptom scales are both more reliable and
                                       valid (Markon et al., 2011a, b). However, diagnoses carry a greater degree of clinical
                                       “respectability,” which we believe is unwarranted, but is a reality nonetheless. One
                                       important issue is the use of “skip-outs”: not assessing a symptom set if a core criterion is
                                       not met. To the extent possible, we recommend against using skip-outs because there often is
                                       important information in symptoms even when a core criterion is not met (Dornbach-Bender
                                       et al., 2017; Kotov, Perlman, Gámez, & Watson, 2015), with some clear exceptions, such as
                                       trauma-related symptoms. Demonstrating that similar inferences can be made from symptom
                                       measures and diagnoses increases the credibility of the symptom measures, so we
                                       recommend comparing them when feasible, all the while recognizing that the obtained




Author Manuscript
                                       correlations are simply indicators of convergent validity between two measures of the same
                                       phenomenon, not a comparison of a proxy against a gold standard.


                       Conclusion
                                       We concluded Clark and Watson (1995) by noting that both the target of measurement and
                                       measurement of the target are important for optimal scale development, that later stages will
                                       proceed more smoothly if the earlier stages have both theoretical clarity and empirical


                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                                            Page 25


                                       precision. These points are still important today, but we now also encourage scale developers




Author Manuscript
                                       to consider the broader context of their target construct, in particular, the reasonably well-
                                       established hierarchical structures of personality and, to a lesser but growing extent,
                                       psychopathology.

                                       Due to expansion of knowledge in our field, it is increasingly important to attend to
                                       measures’ external validity, particularly convergent and discriminant validity, and
                                       incremental validity over well-established measures; as well as to use multi-trait, multi-
                                       method, multi-occasion frameworks for evaluating new measures. Perhaps we can
                                       summarize the direction in which scale development is moving by stating that in the fields of
                                       personality and psychopathology, the nomological net is no longer just an abstract ideal to
                                       which we need only pay lip service, but a practical reality that deserves our full and careful
                                       consideration.




Author Manuscript
                       Acknowledgments
                                       We wish to acknowledge the helpful comments of Jane Loevinger on the original version of this article.

                                       The study reported herein was supported by National Institute of Mental Health Grant R01-MH068472 to David
                                       Watson.


                       References
                                       Achenbach TM, Ivanova MY, & Rescorla LA (2017). Empirically based assessment and taxonomy of
                                         psychopathology for ages 1½–90+ years: Developmental, multi-informant, and multicultural
                                         findings. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 79, 4–18. 10.1016/j.comppsych.2017.03.006 [PubMed:
                                         28356192]
                                       Achenbach TM, Krukowski RA, Dumenci L, & Ivanova MY (2005). Assessment of adult
                                         psychopathology: Meta-analyses and implications of cross-informant correlations. Psychological




Author Manuscript
                                         Bulletin, 131(3), 361–382. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.131.3.361 [PubMed: 15869333]
                                       Ahmed SR, Fowler PJ, & Toro PA (2011). Family, public and private religiousness and psychological
                                         well-being over time in at-risk adolescents. Mental Health, Religion & Culture, 14(4), 393–408. doi:
                                         10.1080/13674671003762685
                                       Allport GW, & Odbert HS (1936). Trait-names: A psycho-lexical study. Psychological Monographs,
                                         47(1), i–171. doi: 10.1037/h0093360
                                       American Educational Research Association, American Psychological Association, National Council
                                         on Measurement in Education, & Joint Committee on Standards for Educational and Psychological
                                         Testing (AERA, APA, & NCME). (2014). Standards for educational and psychological testing.
                                         Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association.
                                       American Psychological Association (1985). Standards for educational and psychological testing.
                                         Washington, DC: Author.
                                       Angleitner A, & Wiggins JS (1985). Personality assessment via questionnaires. New York: Springer-
                                         Verlag.




Author Manuscript
                                       Boyle GJ (1991). Does item homogeneity indicate internal consistency or item redundancy in
                                         psychometric scales? Personality and Individual Differences, 12(3), 291–294.doi:
                                         10.1016/0191-8869(91)90115-R
                                       Briggs SR, & Cheek JM (1986). The role of factor analysis in the development and evaluation of
                                         personality scales. Journal of Personality, 54, 106–148.> doi: 10.1111/j.1467-6494.1986.tb00391
                                       Brown A, & Maydeu-Olivares A (2013). How IRT can solve problems of ipsative data in forced-choice
                                           questionnaires. Psychological Methods, 18(1), 36–52. doi: 10.1037/a0030641 [PubMed:
                                           23148475]




                                          Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                                    Page 26


                                       Burisch M (1984). Approaches to personality inventory construction: A comparison of merits.
                                           American Psychologist, 39, 214–227. doi: 10.1037/0003-066X.39.3.214




Author Manuscript
                                       Campbell DT, & Fiske DW (1959). Convergent and discriminant validation by the multitrait-
                                           multimethod matrix. Psychological Bulletin, 56(2), 81–105. 10.1037/h0046016 [PubMed:
                                           13634291]
                                       Carmona-Perera M, Caracuel A, Pérez-García M, & Verdejo-García A (2015). Brief moral decision-
                                           making questionnaire: A Rasch-derived short form of the Greene dilemmas. Psychological
                                           Assessment, 27(2), 424–432. doi: 10.1037/pas0000049 [PubMed: 25558971]
                                       Clark LA, Livesley WJ, & Morey L (1997). Personality disorder assessment: The challenge of
                                           construct validity. Journal of Personality Disorders, 11, 205–231. 10.1521/pedi.1997.11.3.205
                                           [PubMed: 9348486]
                                       Clark LA (2018). The Improving the Measurement of Personality Project (IMPP). Unpublished
                                           dataset. University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN.
                                       Clark LA, Simms LJ, Wu Kevin, D., & Casillas A (2014). Schedule for Nonadaptive and Adaptive
                                           Personality-2nd Edition (SNAP-2): Manual for Administration, Scoring, and Interpretation. Notre
                                           Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame.




Author Manuscript
                                       Clark LA, & Watson DB (1995). Constructing validity: Basic issues in objective scale development.
                                           Psychological Assessment, 7, 309–319. doi: 10.1037/1040-3590.7.3.309
                                       Comrey AL (1988). Factor-analytic methods of scale development in personality and clinical
                                           psychology. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 56, 754–761. doi:
                                           10.1037/0022-006X.56.5.754 [PubMed: 3057010]
                                       Connelly BS, & Ones DS (2010). An other perspective on personality: Meta-analytic integration of
                                           observers’ accuracy and predictive validity. Psychological Bulletin, 136(6), 1092–1122. doi:
                                           10.1037/a0021212 [PubMed: 21038940]
                                       Costa PT, & McCrae RR (1992). Revised NEO Personality Inventory (NEO-PIR) and NEO Five
                                           Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI) professional manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment
                                           Resources.
                                       Cortina JM (1993). What is coefficient alpha? An examination of theory and applications. Journal of
                                           Applied Psychology, 78, 98–104. doi: 10.1037/0021-9010.78.1.98
                                       Credé M, Tynan MC, & Harms PD (2017). Much ado about grit: A meta-analytic synthesis of the grit




Author Manuscript
                                           literature. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 113(3), 492–511. 10.1037/pspp0000102
                                           [PubMed: 27845531]
                                       Cronbach LJ (1951). Coefficient alpha and the internal structure of tests. Psychometrika, 16, 297–334.
                                           doi: 10.1007/BF02310555
                                       Cronbach LJ, & Meehl PE. (1955). Construct validity in psychological tests. Psychological Bulletin,
                                           52, 281–302. 10.1037/h0040957 [PubMed: 13245896]
                                       Dawes RM, Faust D, & Meehl PE (2002). Clinical versus actuarial judgment In Gilovich T, Griffin D
                                           & Kahneman D (Eds.), Heuristics and biases: The psychology of intuitive judgment; heuristics and
                                           biases: The psychology of intuitive judgment (pp. 716–729, Chapter xvi, 857 Pages) Cambridge
                                           University Press, New York, NY.
                                       De Los Reyes A, Augenstein TM, Wang M, Thomas SA, Drabick DAG, Burgers DE, & Rabinowitz J
                                           (2015). The validity of the multi-informant approach to assessing child and adolescent mental
                                           health. Psychological Bulletin, 141(4), 858–900. doi: 10.1037/a0038498 [PubMed: 25915035]
                                       Dornbach-Bender A, Ruggero CJ, Waszczuk MA, Gamez W, Watson D, & Kotov R (2017). Mapping
                                           emotional disorders at the finest level: Convergent validity and joint structure based on alternative




Author Manuscript
                                           measures. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 79, 3139. 10.1016/j.comppsych.2017.06.011 [PubMed:
                                           28754505]
                                       Duckworth AL, Peterson C, Matthews MD, & Kelly DR (2007). Grit: Perseverance and passion for
                                           long-term goals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92(6), 1087–1101. doi:
                                           10.1037/0022-3514.92.6.1087 [PubMed: 17547490]
                                       Duckworth AL, & Quinn PD (2009). Development and validation of the short grit scale (GRIT–S).
                                           Journal of Personality Assessment, 91(2), 166–174. doi: 10.1080/00223890802634290 [PubMed:
                                           19205937]



                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                                  Page 27


                                       Fabrigar LR, Wegener DT, MacCallum RC, & Strahan EJ (1999). Evaluating the use of exploratory
                                           factor analysis in psychological research. Psychological Methods, 4(3), 272–299. doi:




Author Manuscript
                                           10.1037/1082-989X.4.3.272
                                       Finch JF, & West SG (1997). The investigation of personality structure: Statistical models. Journal of
                                           Research in Personality, 31(4), 439–485. doi: 10.1006/jrpe.1997.2194
                                       Funder DC (2012). Accurate personality judgment. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
                                           21(3), 177–182. doi: 10.1177/0963721412445309
                                       Geisinger KF (2003). Testing and assessment in cross-cultural psychology. In Graham JR, & Naglieri
                                           JA (Eds.), Handbook of psychology: Assessment psychology, vol. 10 (pp. 95–117, Chapter xix,
                                           630 Pages) John Wiley & Sons Inc., Hoboken, NJ.
                                       Glenn JJ, Michel BD, Franklin JC, Hooley JM, & Nock MK (2014). Pain analgesia among adolescent
                                           self-injurers. Psychiatry Research, 220(3), 921–926. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2014.08.016
                                           [PubMed: 25172611]
                                       Green BF Jr. (1978). In defense of measurement. American Psychologist, 33, 664–670.doi:
                                           10.1037/0003-066X.33.7.664
                                       Green DP, Goldman SL, & Salovey P (1993). Measurement error masks bipolarity in affect ratings.




Author Manuscript
                                           Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64(6), 1029–1041. doi:
                                           10.1037/0022-3514.64.6.1029 [PubMed: 8326466]
                                       Guadagnoli E, & Velicer WF (1988). Relation to sample size to the stability of component patterns.
                                           Psychological Bulletin, 103(2), 265–275. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.103.2.265 [PubMed: 3363047]
                                       Haslam N, Holland E, & Kuppens P (2012). Categories versus dimensions in personality and
                                           psychopathology: A quantitative review of taxometric research. Psychological Medicine, 42, 903–
                                           920. doi: 10.1017/S0033291711001966 [PubMed: 21939592]
                                       Haynes SN, Richard DCS, & Kubany ES. (1995). Content validity in psychological assessment: A
                                           functional approach to concepts and methods. Psychological Assessment, 7(3), 238–247.
                                           10.1037/1040-3590.7.3.238
                                       Hogan RT (1983). A socioanalytic theory of personality In Page M (Ed.), 1982 Nebraska Symposium
                                           on Motivation (pp. 55–89). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
                                       Hu L, & Bentler PM (1999). Cutoff criteria for fit indexes in covariance structure analysis:
                                           Conventional criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation Modeling, 6(1), 1–55. doi:




Author Manuscript
                                           10.1080/10705519909540118
                                       Hu L, & Bentler PM (1998). Fit indices in covariance structure modeling: Sensitivity to
                                           underparameterized model misspecification. Psychological Methods, 3(4), 424–453. doi:
                                           10.1037/1082-989X.3.4.424
                                       Hunsley J, & Meyer GJ (2003). The incremental validity of psychological testing and assessment:
                                           Conceptual, methodological, and statistical issues. Psychological Assessment, 15, 446–455. doi:
                                           10.1037/1040-3590.15.4.446 [PubMed: 14692841]
                                       Kotov R, Perlman G, Gamez W, & Watson D (2015). The structure and short-term stability of the
                                           emotional disorders: A dimensional approach. Psychological Medicine, 45, 1687–1698. doi:
                                           10.1017/S0033291714002815 [PubMed: 25499142]
                                       Krueger RF, Derringer J, Markon KE, Watson D, & Skodol AE. (2012). Initial construction of a
                                           maladaptive personality trait model and inventory for DSM-5. Psychological Medicine, 42(9),
                                           1879–1890. 10.1017/S0033291711002674 [PubMed: 22153017]
                                       Lee K, Ogunfowora B, & Ashton MC (2005). Personality traits beyond the big five: Are they within
                                           the HEXACO space? Journal of Personality, 73(5), 1437–1463.doi: 10.1111/j.




Author Manuscript
                                           1467-6494.2005.00354.x [PubMed: 16138878]
                                       Linde JA, Stringer DM, Simms LJ, & Clark LA (2013). The Schedule for Nonadaptive and Adaptive
                                           Personality Youth version (SNAP-Y): Psychometric properties and initial validation. Assessment,
                                           20(4), 387–404. doi: 10.1177/1073191113489847 [PubMed: 23794180]
                                       Loevinger J (1954). The attenuation paradox in test theory. Psychological Bulletin, 51(5), 493–504.
                                           doi: 10.1037/h0058543 [PubMed: 13204488]
                                       Loevinger J (1957). Objective tests as instruments of psychological theory. Psychological Reports, 3,
                                           635–694. doi: 10.2466/PR0.3.7.635-694



                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                                    Page 28


                                       Lowe JR, Edmundson M, & Widiger TA (2009). Assessment of dependency, agreeableness, and their
                                           relationship. Psychological Assessment, 21(4), 543–553. doi: 10.1037/a0016899 [PubMed:




Author Manuscript
                                           19947788]
                                       MacCallum RC, Widaman KF, Zhang S, & Hong S (1999). Sample size in factor analysis.
                                           Psychological Methods, 4(1), 84–99. doi: 10.1037/1082-989X.4.1.84
                                       MacCann C, & Roberts RD (2010). Do time management, grit, and self-control relate to academic
                                           achievement independently of conscientiousness? In Hicks R (Ed.), Personality and individual
                                           differences: Current directions (pp. 79–90). Queensland, Australia: Australian Academic Press.
                                       Mansolf M, & Reise SP (2016). Exploratory bifactor analysis: The Schmid-Leiman orthogonalization
                                           and Jennrich-Bentler analytic rotations. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 51(5), 698–717. doi:
                                           10.1080/00273171.2016.1215898 [PubMed: 27612521]
                                       Markon KE, Chmielewski M, & Miller CJ (2011a). The reliability and validity of discrete and
                                           continuous measures of psychopathology: A quantitative review. Psychological Bulletin, 137(5),
                                           856–879. doi: 10.1037/a0023678 [PubMed: 21574681]
                                       Markon KE, Chmielewski M, & Miller CJ (2011b). “The reliability and validity of discrete and
                                           continuous measures of psychopathology: A quantitative review”: Correction to Markon et al.




Author Manuscript
                                           (2011). Psychological Bulletin, 137(6), 1–1093. doi: 10.1037/a0025727 [PubMed: 21219055]
                                       McCrae RR (2015). A more nuanced view of reliability: Specificity in the trait hierarchy. Personality
                                           and Social Psychology Review, 19(2), 97–112.doi: 10.1177/1088868314541857 [PubMed:
                                           24989047]
                                       McCrae RR, Costa PT Jr., & Martin TA (2005). The NEO-PI-3: A more readable revised NEO
                                           personality inventory. Journal of Personality Assessment, 84(3), 261–270.doi: 10.1207/
                                           s15327752jpa8403_05 [PubMed: 15907162]
                                       McDade-Montez E, Watson D, O’Hara MW, & Denburg NL (2008). The effect of symptom visibility
                                           on informant reporting. Psychology and Aging, 23(4), 940–946.doi: 10.1037/a0014297 [PubMed:
                                           19140663]
                                       Meehl PE (1945). The dynamics of “structured” personality tests. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 1,
                                           296–303. (no doi)
                                       Meehl PE (1978). Theoretical risks and tabular asterisks: Sir Karl, Sir Ronald, and the slow progress of
                                           soft psychology. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 46(4), 806–834. doi:
                                           10.1037/0022-006X.46.4.806




Author Manuscript
                                       Meehl PE & Golden RR (1982). Taxometric methods In Kendall PC & Butcher JN (Eds.). Handbook
                                           of research methods in clinical psychology (pp. 127–181). New York: Wiley.
                                       Messick S (1995). Standards of validity and the validity of standards in performance assessment.
                                           Educational Measurement: Issues and Practice, 14(4), 5–8.doi: 10.1111/j.
                                           1745-3992.1995.tb00881.x
                                       Nunnally JC (1978). Psychometric theory (2nd. ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
                                       Pilkonis PA, Choi SW, Reise SP, Stover AM, Riley WT, & Cella D (2011). Item banks for measuring
                                           emotional distress from the patient-reported outcomes measurement information system
                                           (PROMIS®): Depression, anxiety, and anger. Assessment, 18(3), 263–283.
                                           10.1177/1073191111411667 [PubMed: 21697139]
                                       Putnam SP, Rothbart MK, & Gartstein MA (2008). Homotypic and heterotypic continuity of fine-
                                           grained temperament during infancy, toddlerhood, and early childhood. Infant and Child
                                           Development, 17(4), 387–405. doi: 10.1002/icd.582
                                       Reise SP, Ainsworth AT, & Haviland MG (2005). Item response theory: Fundamentals, applications,




Author Manuscript
                                           and promise in psychological research. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 14(2), 95–
                                           101. doi: 10.1111/j.0963-7214.2005.00342.x
                                       Reise SP, & Waller NG (2009). Item response theory and clinical measurement. Annual Review of
                                           Clinical Psychology, 5, 27–48. doi: 10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.032408.153553
                                       Rudick MM, Yam WH, & Simms LJ (2013). Comparing countdown- and IRT-based approaches to
                                           computerized adaptive personality testing. Psychological Assessment, 25(3), 769–779. doi:
                                           10.1037/a0032541 [PubMed: 23647045]




                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                                     Page 29


                                       Russell DW (2002). In search of underlying dimensions: The use (and abuse) of factor analysis in
                                           personality and social psychology bulletin. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28(12),




Author Manuscript
                                           1629–1646. doi: 10.1177/014616702237645
                                       SAS Institute, Inc. (2013). SAS/ STAT software: Version 9.4. Cary, NC: SAS Institute.
                                       Schmidt FL, Le H, & Ilies R (2003). Beyond alpha: An empirical examination of the effects of
                                           different sources of measurement error on reliability estimates for measures of individual-
                                           differences constructs. Psychological Methods, 8(2), 206–224. 10.1037/1082-989X.8.2.206
                                           [PubMed: 12924815]
                                       Schwartz SJ, Benet-Martínez V, Knight GP, Unger JB, Zamboanga BL, Des Rosiers SE, . . .
                                           Szapocznik J (2014). Effects of language of assessment on the measurement of acculturation:
                                           Measurement equivalence and cultural frame switching. Psychological Assessment, 26(1), 100–
                                           114. doi: 10.1037/a0034717 [PubMed: 24188146]
                                       Simms LJ & Watson D (2007). The construct validation approach to personality scale construction In
                                           Robins RW, Fraley RC, & Krueger RF (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in personality
                                           psychology (pp. 240–258). New York: Guilford Press.
                                       Simms LJ, Zelazny K, Williams TF, & Bernstein L (2019). Does the number of response options




Author Manuscript
                                           matter? psychometric perspectives using personality questionnaire data Psychological Assessment,
                                           31(4), 557–566. 10.1037/pas0000648 [PubMed: 30869956]
                                       Smith GT, & McCarthy DM (1995). Methodological considerations in the refinement of clinical
                                           assessment instruments. Psychological Assessment, 7, 300–308. doi: 10.1037/1040-3590.7.3.300
                                       Smith GT, McCarthy DM, & Anderson KG (2001). On the sins of short-form development.
                                           Psychological Assessment, 12, 102–111. doi: 10.1037/1040-3590.12.1.102
                                       Soto CJ, & John OP (2017). Short and extra-short forms of the Big Five Inventory–2: The BFI-2-S and
                                           BFI-2-XS. Journal of Research in Personality, 68, 69–81.doi: 10.1016/j.jrp.2017.02.004
                                       Spitzer RL, Forman JB, & Nee J (1979). DSM-III field trials: I. initial interrater diagnostic reliability.
                                           The American Journal of Psychiatry, 136(6), 815–817.doi: 10.1176/ajp.136.6.815 [PubMed:
                                           443467]
                                       Streiner DL (2003). Starting at the beginning: An introduction to coefficient alpha and internal
                                           consistency. Journal of Personality Assessment, 80(1), 99–103.doi: 10.1207/
                                           S15327752JPA8001_18 [PubMed: 12584072]




Author Manuscript
                                       Tackett JL, Lahey BB, van Hulle C, Waldman I, Krueger RF, & Rathouz PJ (2013). Common genetic
                                           influences on negative emotionality and a general psychopathology factor in childhood and
                                           adolescence. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 122(4), 1142–1153. doi: 10.1037/a0034151
                                           [PubMed: 24364617]
                                       Tellegen A, & Waller NG (2008). Exploring personality through test construction: Development of the
                                           multidimensional personality questionnaire In Boyle GJ, Matthews G & Saklofske DH (Eds.), The
                                           SAGE handbook of personality theory and assessment, vol. 2: Personality measurement and
                                           testing (pp. 261–292) Sage Publications, Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA. doi:
                                           10.4135/9781849200479.n1
                                       Watson D, Clark LA, & Chmielewski M (2008). Structures of personality and their relevance to
                                           psychopathology: II. Further articulation of a comprehensive unified trait structure. Journal of
                                           Personality, 76(6), 1485–1522. 10.1111/j.1467-6494.2008.00531.x [PubMed: 19012656]
                                       Watson D (2012). Objective tests as instruments of psychological theory and research In Cooper H
                                           (Ed.), Handbook of Research Methods in Psychology. Volume 1: Foundations, planning, measures,
                                           and psychometrics (pp. 349–369). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.




Author Manuscript
                                       Watson D, & Clark LA (1992). On traits and temperament: General and specific factors of emotional
                                           experience and their relation to the five-factor model. Journal of Personality, 60(2), 441–476. doi:
                                           10.1111/j.1467-6494.1992.tb00980.x [PubMed: 1635050]
                                       Watson D, Clark LA, Chmielewski M, & Kotov R (2013). The value of suppressor effects in
                                           explicating the construct validity of symptom measures. Psychological Assessment, 25(3), 929–
                                           941. doi: 10.1037/a0032781 [PubMed: 23795886]
                                       Watson D, Clark LA, & Harkness AR (1994). Structures of personality and their relevance to
                                           psychopathology. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 103, 18–31. doi: 10.1037/0021-843X.103.1.18
                                           [PubMed: 8040477]


                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                                  Page 30


                                       Watson D, Clark LA, & Tellegen A (1984). Cross-cultural convergence in the structure of mood: A
                                          Japanese replication and a comparison with U. S. findings. Journal of Personality and Social




Author Manuscript
                                          Psychology, 47, 127–144. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.47.1.127
                                       Watson D, Nus E, & Wu KD (2019). Development and validation of the faceted inventory of the five-
                                          factor model (FI-FFM). Assessment, 26(1), 17–44. 10.1177/1073191117711022 [PubMed:
                                          28583005]
                                       Watson D, O’Hara MW, Simms LJ, Kotov R, Chmielewski M, McDade-Montez E, . . . Stuart S (2007).
                                          Development and validation of the inventory of depression and anxiety symptoms (IDAS).
                                          Psychological Assessment, 19(3), 253–268. doi: 10.1037/1040-3590.19.3.253 [PubMed:
                                          17845118]
                                       Watson D, Stanton K, & Clark LA (2017). Self-report indicators of negative valence constructs within
                                          the research domain criteria (RDoC): A critical review. Journal of Affective Disorders, 216, 58–69.
                                          doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2016.09.065 [PubMed: 27823854]
                                       Watson D, Stasik SM, Ellickson-Larew S, & Stanton K (2015). Extraversion and psychopathology: A
                                          facet-level analysis. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 124(2), 432–446. doi: 10.1037/abn0000051
                                          [PubMed: 25751628]




Author Manuscript
                                       Watson D, Suls J, & Haig J (2002). Global self-esteem in relation to structural models of personality
                                          and affectivity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83(1), 185–197. doi:
                                          10.1037/0022-3514.83.1.185 [PubMed: 12088125]
                                       Zimmermann J, & Wright AGC (2017). Beyond description in interpersonal construct validation:
                                          Methodological advances in the circumplex structural summary approach. Assessment, 24(1), 3–
                                          23. doi: 10.1177/1073191115621795 [PubMed: 26685192]
                                       Zimmerman M (1994). Diagnosing personality disorders: A review of issues and research models.
                                          Archives of General Psychiatry, 51(3), 225–245.doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.1994.03950030061006
                                          [PubMed: 8122959]




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                          Page 31



                                                                     Public Significance Statement:




Author Manuscript
                                       Over the past 50 years, our understanding has greatly increased regarding how various
                                       psychological problems are interrelated and how they relate to various aspects of
                                       personality. In this context, this article describes a “best practice” process and relevant
                                       specific issues for developing measures to assess personality and psychological problems.




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript




                                         Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
                    Clark and Watson                                                                                                                     Page 32




                                                                                     Table 1

                    Correlations among Selected IDAS Items (Overall Standardized Sample)




Author Manuscript
                     Paraphrased Item                         1     2     3

                     Model 1 – Sleep problems, AIC = .46
                     1. Slept less than usual                —
                     2. Had trouble falling asleep           .45   —
                     3. Woke up earlier than usual           .36   .34   —
                     4. Slept very poorly                    .54   .61   .45
                     Model 2 – Depression, AIC = .31
                     1. Felt depressed                       —
                     2. Did not have much of an appetite     .34   —
                     3. Woke up earlier than usual           .26   22    —
                     4. Took a lot of effort to get going    .50   .25   .24




Author Manuscript
                     Model 3 – Internalizing, AIC = .29
                     1. Felt dizzy or lightheaded            —
                     2. Little things made me mad            .32   —
                     3. Woke up earlier than usual           .24   .24   —
                     4. Was difficult to make eye contact    .31   .36   .24

                    Note. N = 8,305. IDAS-II = Expanded version of the Inventory of Depression and Anxiety Symptoms. AIC = Average interitem correlation. Target
                    item is bolded.




Author Manuscript




Author Manuscript

                                                Psychol Assess. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 December 01.
