CONSTRUCT VALIDITY IN PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTS1
Lee J. Cronbach and Paul E. Meehl
Validation of psychological tests has not yet been adequately conceptualized, as
the APA Committee on Test Standards learned when it undertook (1950-54) to
specify what qualities should be investigated before a test is published. In order
to make coherent recommendations the Committee found it necessary to
distinguish four types of validity, established by different types of research and
requiring different interpretation. The chief innovation in the Committee’s report
was the term construct validity.2 This idea was first formulated by a subcommittee (Meehl and R. C. Challman) studying how proposed recommendations
would apply to projective techniques, and later modified and clarified by the
entire committee (Bordin, Challman, Conrad, Humphreys, Meehl, and Super).
The statements agreed upon by the committee (and by committees of two other
associations) were published in the “Technical Recommendations” (APA
Committee on Test Standards, 1954). The present interpretation of construct
validity is not “official” and deals with some areas where the Committee would
probably not be unanimous. The present writers are solely responsible for this
attempt to explain the concept and elaborate its implications.
Identification of construct validity was not an isolated development.
Writers on validity during the preceding decade had shown a great deal of
dissatisfaction with conventional notions of validity, and introduced new terms
and ideas, but the resulting aggregation of types of validity seems only to
have stirred the muddy waters. Portions of the distinctions we shall discuss
are implicit in Jenkins’ paper, “Validity for what?” (1946), Gulliksen’s
“Intrinsic validity” (1950), Goodenough’s distinction between tests as “signs”
and “samples” (1950), Cronbach’s separation of “logical” and “empirical”
validity (1949), Guilford’s “factorial validity” (1946), and Mosier’s papers on
“face validity” and “validity generalization” (1947, 1951). Helen Peak (1953)
comes close to an explicit statement of construct validity as we shall present it.

Four Types of Validation
The categories into which the Recommendations divide validity studies are:
predictive validity, concurrent validity, content validity, and construct validity.
The first two of these may be considered together as criterion-oriented
validation procedures.
The pattern of a criterion-oriented study is familiar. The investigator is
primarily interested in some criterion which he wishes to predict. He administers
the test, obtains an independent criterion measure on the same subjects, and
1

First published in Psychological Bulletin, 1955, 52, 281-302.
Referred to in a preliminary report (58) as congruent validity.

2

1

2

Lee J. Cronbach and Paul E. Meehl

computes a correlation. If the criterion is obtained some time after the test is
given, he is studying predictive validity. If the test score and criterion score are
determined at essentially the same time, he is studying concurrent validity.
Concurrent validity is studied when one test is proposed as a substitute for
another (for example, when a multiple-choice form of spelling test is substituted
for taking dictation), or a test is shown to correlate with some contemporary
criterion (e.g., psychiatric diagnosis).
Content validity is established by showing that the test items are a sample of
a universe in which the investigator is interested. Content validity is ordinarily
to be established deductively, by defining a universe of items and sampling
systematically within this universe to establish the test.
Construct validation is involved whenever a test is to be interpreted as a
measure of some attribute or quality which is not “operationally defined.” The
problem faced by the investigator is, “What constructs account for variance in
test performance?” Construct validity calls for no new scientific approach. Much
current research on tests of personality (1954) is construct validation, usually
without the benefit of a clear formulation of this process.
Construct validity is not to be identified solely by particular investigative
procedures, but by the orientation of the investigator. Criterion-oriented validity,
as Bechtoldt emphasizes (1951, p. 1245), “involves the acceptance of a set of
operations as an adequate definition of whatever is to be measured.” When an
investigator believes that no criterion available to him is fully valid, he perforce
becomes interested in construct validity because this is the only way to avoid
the “infinite frustration” of relating every criterion to some more ultimate
standard ([n.d., Gaylord, unpublished]). In content validation, acceptance of the
universe of content as defining the variable to be measured is essential.
Construct validity must be investigated whenever no criterion or universe of
content is accepted as entirely adequate to define the quality to be measured.
Determining what psychological constructs account for test performance is
desirable for almost any test. Thus, although the MMPI was originally
established on the basis of empirical discrimination between patient groups and
so-called normals (concurrent validity), continuing research has tried to provide
a basis for describing the personality associated with each score pattern. Such
interpretations permit the clinician to predict performance with respect to criteria
which have not yet been employed in empirical validation studies (cf. [Meehl]
1954, pp. 49-50, 110-111).
We can distinguish among the four types of validity by noting that each
involves a different emphasis on the criterion. In predictive or concurrent
validity, the criterion behavior is of concern to the tester, and he may have
no concern whatsoever with the type of behavior exhibited in the test. (An
employer does not care if a worker can manipulate blocks, but the score on
the block test may predict something he cares about.) Content validity is
studied when the tester is concerned with the type of behavior involved in
the test performance. Indeed, if the test is a work sample, the behavior

Construct Validity

3

represented in the test may be an end in itself. Construct validity is
ordinarily studied when the tester has no definite criterion measure of the
quality with which he is concerned, and must use indirect measures. Here
the trait or quality underlying the test if of central importance, rather than
either the test behavior or the scores on the criteria. [APA Committee on
Test Standards, 1954, p. 14]
Construct validation is important at times for every sort of psychological
test: aptitude, achievement, interests, and so on. Thurstone’s statement is
interesting in this connection:
In the field of intelligence tests, it used to be common to define validity as
the correlation between a test score and some outside criterion. We have
reached a stage of sophistication where the test-criterion correlation is too
coarse. It is obsolete. If we attempted to ascertain the validity of a test for
the second space-factor, for example, we would have to get judges [to]
make reliable judgments about people as to this factor. Ordinarily their [the
available judges’] ratings would be of no value as a criterion. Consequently,
validity studies in the cognitive functions now depend on criteria of internal
consistency . . . [Thurstone, 1952, p. 3]
Construct validity would be involved in answering such questions as: To what
extent is this test culture-free? Does this test of “interpretation of data” measure
reading ability, quantitative reasoning, or response sets? How does a person with
A in Strong Accountant, and B in Strong CPA, differ from a person who has
these scores reversed?
Example of construct validation procedure. Suppose measure X correlates
.50 with Y, the amount of palmar sweating induced when we tell a student that
he has failed a Psychology I exam. Predictive validity of X for Y is adequately
described by the coefficient, and a statement of the experimental and sampling
conditions. If someone were to ask, “Isn’t there perhaps another way to interpret
this correlation?” or “What other kinds of evidence can you bring to support
your interpretation?”, we would hardly understand what he was asking because
no interpretation has been made. These questions become relevant when the
correlation is advanced as evidence that “test X measures anxiety proneness.”
Alternative interpretations are possible; e.g., perhaps the test measures
“academic aspiration,” in which case we will expect different results if we
induce palmar sweating by economic threat. It is then reasonable to inquire
about other kinds of evidence.
Add these facts from further studies: Test X correlates .45 with fraternity
brothers’ ratings on “tenseness.” Test X correlates .55 with amount of intellectual inefficiency induced by painful electric shock, and .68 with the Taylor
Anxiety scale. Mean X score decreases among four diagnosed groups in this
order: anxiety state, reactive depression, “normal,” and psychopathic
personality. And palmar sweat under threat of failure in Psychology I correlates

4

Lee J. Cronbach and Paul E. Meehl

.60 with threat of failure in mathematics. Negative results eliminate competing
explanations of the X score; thus, findings of negligible correlations between X
and social class, vocational aim, and value-orientation make it fairly safe to
reject the suggestion that X measures “academic aspiration.” We can have
substantial confidence that X does measure anxiety proneness if the current
theory of anxiety can embrace the variates which yield positive correlations, and
does not predict correlations where we found none.

Kinds of Constructs
At this point we should indicate summarily what we mean by a construct,
recognizing that much of the remainder of the paper deals with this question. A
construct is some postulated attribute of people, assumed to be reflected in test
performance. In test validation the attribute about which we make statements in
interpreting a test is a construct. We expect a person at any time to possess or
not possess a qualitative attribute (amnesia) or structure, or to possess some
degree of a quantitative attribute (cheerfulness). A construct has certain
associated meanings carried in statements of this general character: Persons who
possess this attribute will, in situation X, act in manner Y (with a stated
probability). The logic of construct validation is invoked whether the construct
is highly systematized or loose, used in ramified theory or a few simple
propositions, used in absolute prepositions or probability statements. We seek to
specify how one is to defend a proposed interpretation of a test: we are not
recommending any one type of interpretation.
The constructs in which tests are to be interpreted are certainly not likely to
be physiological. Most often they will be traits such as “latent hostility” or
“variable in mood,” or descriptions in terms of an educational objective, as
“ability to plan experiments.” For the benefit of readers who may have been
influenced by certain eisegeses of MacCorquodale and Meehl (1948), let us here
emphasize: Whether or not an interpretation of a test’s properties or relations
involves questions of construct validity is to be decided by examining the entire
body of evidence offered, together with what is asserted about the test in the
context of this evidence. Proposed identifications of constructs allegedly
measured by the test with constructs of other sciences (e.g., genetics,
neuroanatomy, biochemistry) make up only one class of construct-validity
claims, and a rather minor one at present. Space does not permit full analysis of
the relation of the present paper to the MacCorquodale-Meehl distinction
between hypothetical constructs and intervening variables. The philosophy of
science pertinent to the present paper is set forth later in the section entitled,
“The nomological network.”

Construct Validity

5

The Relation of Constructs to “Criteria”
Critical View of the Criterion Implied
An unquestionable criterion may be found in a practical operation, or may be
established as a consequence of an operational definition. Typically, however,
the psychologist is unwilling to use the directly operational approach because he
is interested in building theory about a generalized construct. A theorist trying to
relate behavior to “hunger” almost certainly invests that term with meanings
other than the operation “elapsed-time-since-feeding.” If he is concerned with
hunger as a tissue need, he will not accept time lapse as equivalent to his
construct because it fails to consider, among other things, energy expenditure of
the animal.
In some situations the criterion is no more valid than the test. Suppose, for
example, that we want to know if counting the dots on Bender-Gestalt figure
five indicates “compulsive rigidity,” and take psychiatric ratings on this trait as a
criterion. Even a conventional report on the resulting correlation will say
something about the extent and intensity of the psychiatrist’s contacts and
should describe his qualifications (e.g., diplomate status? analyzed?).
Why report these facts? Because data are needed to indicate whether the
criterion is any good. “Compulsive rigidity” is not really intended to mean
“social stimulus value to psychiatrists.” The implied trait involves a range of
behavior-dispositions which may be very imperfectly sampled by the psychiatrist. Suppose dot-counting does not occur in a particular patient and yet we find
that the psychiatrist has rated him as “rigid.” When questioned the psychiatrist
tells us that the patient was a rather easy, free-wheeling sort; however, the
patient did lean over to straighten out a skewed desk blotter, and this, viewed
against certain other facts, tipped the scale in favor of a “rigid” rating. On the
face of it, counting Bender dots may be just as good (or poor) a sample of the
compulsive-rigidity domain as straightening desk blotters is.
Suppose, to extend our example, we have four tests on the “predictor” side,
over against the psychiatrist’s “criterion,” and find generally positive correlations among the five variables. Surely it is artificial and arbitrary to impose
the “test-should-predict-criterion” pattern on such data. The psychiatrist samples
verbal content, expressive pattern, voice, posture, etc. The psychologist samples
verbal content, perception, expressive pattern, etc. Our proper conclusion is that,
from this evidence, the four tests and the psychiatrist all assess some common
factor.
The asymmetry between the “test” and the so-designated “criterion” arises
only because the terminology of predictive validity has become a commonplace
in test analysis. In this study where a construct is the central concern, any
distinction between the merit of the test and criterion variables would be
justified only if it had already been shown that the psychiatrist’s theory and
operations were excellent measures of the attribute.

6

Lee J. Cronbach and Paul E. Meehl

Inadequacy of Validation in Terms of Specific Criteria
The proposal to validate constructual interpretations of tests runs counter to
suggestions of some others. Spiker and McCandless (1954) favor an operational
approach. Validation is replaced by compiling statements as to how strongly the
test predicts other observed variables of interest. To avoid requiring that each
new variable be investigated completely by itself, they allow two variables to
collapse into one whenever the properties of the operationally defined measures
are the same: “If a new test is demonstrated to predict the scores on an older,
well-established test, then an evaluation of the predictive power of the older test
may be used for the new one.” But accurate inferences are possible only if the
two tests correlate so highly that there is negligible reliable variance in either
test, independent of the other. Where the correspondence is less close, one must
either retain all the separate variables operationally defined or embark on
construct validation.
The practical user of tests must rely on constructs of some generality to
make predictions about new situations. Test X could be used to predict palmar
sweating in the face of failure without invoking any construct, but a counselor is
more likely to be asked to forecast behavior in diverse or even unique situations
for which the correlation of test X is unknown. Significant predictions rely on
knowledge accumulated around the generalized construct of anxiety. The
Technical Recommendations state:
It is ordinarily necessary to evaluate construct validity by integrating
evidence from many different sources. The problem of construct validation
becomes especially acute in the clinical field since for many of the
constructs dealt with it is not a question of finding an imperfect criterion but
of finding any criterion at all. The psychologist interested in construct
validity for clinical devices is concerned with making an estimate of a
hypothetical internal process, factor, system, structure, or state and cannot
expect to find a clear unitary behavioral criterion. An attempt to identify
any one criterion measure or any composite as the criterion aimed at is,
however, usually unwarranted. [APA Committee on Test Standards, 1954,
pp. 14-15]
This appears to conflict with arguments for specific criteria prominent at
places in the testing literature. Thus Anastasi (1950) makes many statements of
the latter character: “It is only as a measure of a specifically defined criterion
that a test can be objectively validated at all . . . To claim that a test measures
anything over and above its criterion is pure speculation” (p. 67). Yet elsewhere
this article supports construct validation. Tests can be profitably interpreted if
we “know the relationships between the tested behavior . . . and other behavior
samples, none of these behavior samples necessarily occupying the preeminent
position of a criterion” (p. 75). Factor analysis with several partial criteria might
be used to study whether a test measures a postulated “general learning ability.”
If the data demonstrate specificity of ability instead, such specificity is “useful

Construct Validity

7

in its own right in advancing our knowledge of behavior; it should not be
construed as a weakness of the tests” (p. 75).
We depart from Anastasi at two points. She writes, “The validity of a
psychological test should not be confused with an analysis of the factors which
determine the behavior under consideration.” We, however, regard such analysis
as a most important type of validation. Second, she refers to “the will-o’-thewisp of psychological processes which are distinct from performance” (1950, p.
77). While we agree that psychological processes are elusive, we are sympathetic to attempts to formulate and clarify constructs which are evidenced by
performance but distinct from it. Surely an inductive inference based on a
pattern of correlations cannot be dismissed as “pure speculation.”

Specific Criteria Used Temporarily: The “Bootstraps” Effect
Even when a test is constructed on the basis of a specific criterion, it may
ultimately be judged to have greater construct validity than the criterion.
We start with a vague concept which we associate with certain observations. We
then discover empirically that these observations covary with some other
observation which possesses greater reliability or is more intimately correlated
with relevant experimental changes than is the original measure, or both. For
example, the notion of temperature arises because some objects feel hotter to the
touch than others. The expansion of a mercury column does not have face
validity as an index of hotness. But it turns out that (a) there is a statistical
relation between expansion and sensed temperature; (b) observers employ the
mercury method with good interobserver agreement; (c) the regularity of
observed relations is increased by using the thermometer (e.g., melting points of
samples of the same material vary little on the thermometer; we obtain nearly
linear relations between mercury measures and pressure of a gas). Finally, (d) a
theoretical structure involving unobservable microevents—the kinetic theory—
is worked out which explains the relation of mercury expansion to heat. This
whole process of conceptual enrichment begins with what in retrospect we see
as an extremely fallible “criterion”—the human temperature sense. That original
criterion has now been relegated to a peripheral position. We have lifted
ourselves by our bootstraps, but in a legitimate and fruitful way.
Similarly, the Binet scale was first valued because children’s scores tended
to agree with judgments by schoolteachers. If it had not shown this agreement, it
would have been discarded along with reaction time and the other measures of
ability previously tried. Teacher judgments once constituted the criterion against
which the individual intelligence test was validated. But if today a child’s IQ is
135 and three of his teachers complain about how stupid he is, we do not
conclude that the test has failed. Quite to the contrary, if no error in test
procedure can be argued, we treat the test score as a valid statement about an
important quality, and define our task as that of finding out what other
variables—personality, study skills, etc.—modify achievement or distort teacher
judgment.

8

Lee J. Cronbach and Paul E. Meehl

Experimentation to Investigate Construct Validity
Validation Procedures
We can use many methods in construct validation. Attention should particularly
be drawn to Macfarlane’s survey of these methods as they apply to projective
devices (1942).
Group differences. If our understanding of a construct leads us to expect
two groups to differ on the test, this expectation may be tested directly. Thus
Thurstone and Chave validated the Scale for Measuring Attitude Toward the
Church by showing score differences between church members and nonchurchgoers. Churchgoing is not the criterion of attitude, for the purpose of the test is
to measure something other than the crude sociological fact of church
attendance; on the other hand, failure to find a difference would have seriously
challenged the test.
Only coarse correspondence between test and group designation is
expected. Too great a correspondence between the two would indicate that the
test is to some degree invalid, because members of the groups are expected to
overlap on the test. Intelligence test items are selected initially on the basis of a
correspondence to age, but an item that correlates .95 with age in an elementary
school sample would surely be suspect.
Correlation matrices and factor analysis. If two tests are presumed to
measure the same construct, a correlation between them is predicted. (An
exception is noted where some second attribute has positive loading in the first
test and negative loading in the second test; then a low correlation is expected.
This is a testable interpretation provided an external measure of either the first
or the second variable exists.) If the obtained correlation departs from the
expectation, however, there is no way to know whether the fault lies in test A,
test B, or the formulation of the construct. A matrix of intercorrelations often
points out profitable ways of dividing the construct into more meaningful parts,
factor analysis being a useful computational method in such studies.
Guilford (1948) has discussed the place of factor analysis in construct
validation. His statements may be extracted as follows: “The personnel psychologist wishes to know ‘why his tests are valid.’ He can place tests and practical
criteria in a matrix and factor it to identify ‘real dimensions of human
personality.’ A factorial description is exact and stable; it is economical in
explanation; it leads to the creation of pure tests which can be combined to
predict complex behaviors.” It is clear that factors here function as constructs.
Eysenck, in his “criterion analysis” (1950), goes farther than Guilford, and
shows that factoring can be used explicitly to test hypotheses about constructs.
Factors may or may not be weighted with surplus meaning. Certainly when
they are regarded as “real dimensions” a great deal of surplus meaning is
implied, and the interpreter must shoulder a substantial burden of proof. The
alternative view is to regard factors as defining a working reference frame,
located in a convenient manner in the “space” defined by all behaviors of a

Construct Validity

9

given type. Which set of factors from a given matrix is “most useful” will
depend partly on predilections, but in essence the best construct is the one
around which we can build the greatest number of inferences, in the most direct
fashion.
Studies of internal structure. For many constructs, evidence of homogeneity
within the test is relevant in judging validity. If a trait such as dominance is
hypothesized, and the items inquire about behaviors subsumed under this label,
then the hypothesis appears to require that these items be generally intercorrelated. Even low correlations, if consistent, would support the argument that
people may be fruitfully described in terms of a generalized tendency to
dominate or not dominate. The general quality would have power to predict
behavior in a variety of situations represented by the specific items. Item-test
correlations and certain reliability formulas describe internal consistency.
It is unwise to list uninterpreted data of this sort under the heading
“validity” in test manuals, as some authors have done. High internal consistency
may lower validity. Only if the underlying theory of the trait being measured
calls for high item intercorrelations do the correlations support construct
validity. Negative item-test correlations may support construct validity, provided
that the items with negative correlations are believed irrelevant to the postulated
construct and serve as suppressor variables (Horst, 1941, p. 431-436; 44).
Study of distinctive subgroups of items within a test may set an upper limit
to construct validity by showing that irrelevant elements influence scores. Thus
a study of the PMA space tests shows that variance can be partially accounted
for by a response set, tendency to mark many figures as similar (Cronbach,
1950). An internal factor analysis of the PEA Interpretation of Data Test shows
that in addition to measuring reasoning skills, the test score is strongly
influenced by a tendency to say “probably true” rather than “certainly true,”
regardless of item content (Damrin, 1952). On the other hand, a study of item
groupings in the DAT Mechanical Comprehension Test permitted rejection of
the hypothesis that knowledge about specific topics such as gears made a
substantial contribution to scores (Cronbach, 1951).
Studies of change over occasions. The stability of test scores (“retest
reliability,” Cattell’s “N-technique”) may be relevant to construct validation.
Whether a high degree of stability is encouraging or discouraging for the
proposed interpretation depends upon the theory defining the construct.
More powerful than the retest after uncontrolled intervening experiences is
the retest with experimental intervention. If a transient influence swings test
scores over a wide range, there are definite limits on the extent to which a test
result can be interpreted as reflecting the typical behavior of the individual.
These are examples of experiments which have indicated upper limits to test
validity: studies of differences associated with the examiner in projective
testing, of change of score under alternative directions (“tell the truth” vs. “make
yourself look good to an employer”), and of coachability of mental tests. We
may recall Gulliksen’s distinction (1950): When the coaching is of a sort that
improves the pupil’s intellectual functioning in school, the test which is affected

10

Lee J. Cronbach and Paul E. Meehl

by the coaching has validity as a measure of intellectual functioning; if the
coaching improves test taking but not school performance, the test which
responds to the coaching has poor validity as a measure of this construct.
Sometimes, where differences between individuals are difficult to assess by
any means other than the test, the experimenter validates by determining
whether the test can detect induced intra-individual differences. One might
hypothesize that the Zeigarnik effect is a measure of ego involvement, i.e., that
with ego involvement there is more recall of incomplete tasks. To support such
an interpretation, the investigator will try to induce ego involvement on some
task by appropriate directions and compare subjects’ recall with their recall for
tasks where there was a contrary induction. Sometimes the intervention is
drastic. Porteus finds (1950) that brain-operated patients show disruption of
performance on his maze, but do not show impaired performance on
conventional verbal tests and argues therefrom that his test is a better measure of
planfulness.
Studies of process. One of the best ways of determining informally what
accounts for variability on a test is the observation of the person’s process of
performance. If it is supposed, for example, that a test measures mathematical
competence, and yet observation of students’ errors shows that erroneous
reading of the question is common, the implications of a low score are altered.
Lucas in this way showed that the Navy Relative Movement Test, an aptitude
test, actually involved two different abilities: spatial visualization and mathematical reasoning (Lucas, 1953).
Mathematical analysis of scoring procedures may provide important
negative evidence on construct validity. A recent analysis of “empathy” tests is
perhaps worth citing (Cronbach, 1955a). “Empathy” has been operationally
defined in many studies by the ability of a judge to predict what responses will
be given on some questionnaire by a subject he has observed briefly. A mathematical argument has shown, however, that the scores depend on several
attributes of the judge which enter into his perception of any individual, and that
they therefore cannot be interpreted as evidence of his ability to interpret cues
offered by particular others, or his intuition.

The Numerical Estimate of Construct Validity
There is an understandable tendency to seek a “construct validity coefficient.” A
numerical statement of the degree of construct validity would be a statement of
the proportion of the test score variance that is attributable to the construct
variable. This numerical estimate can sometimes be arrived at by a factor
analysis, but since present methods of factor analysis are based on linear
relations, more general methods will ultimately be needed to deal with many
quantitative problems of construct validation.
Rarely will it be possible to estimate definite “construct saturations,”
because no factor corresponding closely to the construct will be available. One
can only hope to set upper and lower bounds to the “loading.” If “creativity” is

Construct Validity

11

defined as something independent of knowledge, then a correlation of .40
between a presumed test of creativity and a test of arithmetic knowledge would
indicate that at least 16 per cent of the reliable test variance is irrelevant to
creativity as defined. Laboratory performance on problems such as Maier’s
“hatrack” would scarcely be an ideal measure of creativity, but it would be
somewhat relevant. If its correlation with the test is .60, this permits a tentative
estimate of 36 per cent as a lower bound. (The estimate is tentative because the
test might overlap with the irrelevant portion of the laboratory measure.) The
saturation seems to lie between 36 and 84 percent; a cumulation of studies
would provide better limits.
It should be particularly noted that rejecting the null hypothesis does not
finish the job of construct validation (Kelly, 1954, p. 284). The problem is not to
conclude that the test “is valid” for measuring the construct variable. The task is
to state as definitely as possible the degree of validity the test is presumed to
have.

The Logic of Construct Validation
Construct validation takes place when an investigator believes that his instrument reflects a particular construct, to which are attached certain meanings. The
proposed interpretation generates specific testable hypotheses, which are a
means of confirming or disconfirming the claim. The philosophy of science
which we believe does most justice to actual scientific practice will not be
briefly and dogmatically set forth. Readers interested in further study of the
philosophical underpinning are referred to the works by Braithwaite (1953,
especially Chapter III), Carnap (1939, pp. 56-69; 1950), Pap (1953), Sellars
(1948, 1954), Feigl (1950a, 1951), Beck (1950), Kneale (1949, pp. 92-110),
Hempel (1950; 1952, Sec. 7).

The Nomological Net
The fundamental principles are these:
1. Scientifically speaking, to “make clear what something is” means to set
forth the laws in which it occurs. We shall refer to the interlocking system of
laws which constitute a theory as a nomological network.
2. The laws in a nomological network may relate (a) observable properties
or quantities to each other; or (b) theoretical constructs to observables; or (c)
different theoretical constructs to one another. These “laws” may be statistical or
deterministic.
3. A necessary condition for a construct to be scientifically admissible is
that it occur in a nomological net, at least some of whose laws involve
observables. Admissible constructs may be remote from observation, i.e., a long
derivation may intervene between the nomologicals which implicitly define the
construct, and the (derived) nomologicals of type a. These latter propositions
permit predictions about events. The construct is not “reduced” to the

12

Lee J. Cronbach and Paul E. Meehl

observations, but only combined with other constructs in the net to make
predictions about observables.
4. “Learning more about” a theoretical construct is a matter of elaborating
the nomological network in which it occurs, or of increasing the definiteness of
the components. At least in the early history of a construct the network will be
limited, and the construct will as yet have few connections.
5. An enrichment of the net such as adding a construct or a relation to
theory is justified if it generates nomologicals that are confirmed by observation
or if it reduces the number of nomologicals required to predict the same
observations. When observations will not fit into the network as it stands, the
scientist has a certain freedom in selecting where to modify the network. That is,
there may be alternative constructs or ways of organizing the net which for the
time being are equally defensible.
6. We can say that “operations” which are qualitatively very different
“overlap” or “measure the same thing” if their positions in the nomological net
tie them to the same construct variable. Our confidence in this identification
depends upon the amount of inductive support we have for the regions of the net
involved. It is not necessary that a direct observational comparison of the two
operations be made—we may be content with an intranetwork proof indicating
that the two operations yield estimates of the same network-defined quantity.
Thus, physicists are content to speak of the “temperature” of the sun and the
“temperature” of a gas at room temperature even though the test operations are
nonoverlapping because this identification makes theoretical sense.
With these statements of scientific methodology in mind, we return to the
specific problem of construct validity as applied to psychological tests. The
preceding guide rules should reassure the “toughminded,” who fear that
allowing construct validation opens the door to nonconfirmable test claims. The
answer is that unless the network makes contact with observations, and exhibits
explicit, public steps of inference, construct validation cannot be claimed. An
admissible psychological construct must be behavior-relevant (Technical
Recommendations, 1954, p. 15). For most tests intended to measure constructs,
adequate criteria do not exist. This being the case, many such tests have been
left unvalidated, or a finespun network of rationalizations has been offered as if
it were validation. Rationalization is not construct validation. One who claims
that his test reflects a construct cannot maintain his claim in the face of recurrent
negative results because these results show that his construct is too loosely
defined to yield verifiable inferences.
A rigorous (though perhaps probabilistic) chain of inference is required to
establish a test as a measure of a construct. To validate a claim that a test
measures a construct, a nomological net surrounding the concept must exist.
When a construct is fairly new, there may be few specifiable associations by
which to pin down the concept. As research proceeds, the construct sends out
roots in many directions, which attach it to more and more facts or other
constructs. Thus the electron has more accepted properties than the neutrino:
numerical ability has more than the second space factor.

Construct Validity

13

“Acceptance,” which was critical in criterion-oriented and content validities, has now appeared in construct validity. Unless substantially the same
nomological net is accepted by the several users of the construct, public
validation is impossible. If A uses aggressiveness to mean overt assault on
others, and B’s usage includes repressed hostile reactions, evidence which
convinces B that a test measures aggressiveness convinces A that the test does
not. Hence, the investigator who proposes to establish a test as a measure of a
construct must specify his network or theory sufficiently clearly that others can
accept or reject it (cf. Macfarlane, 1942, p. 406). A consumer of the test who
rejects the author’s theory cannot accept the author’s validation. He must
validate the test for himself, if he wishes to show that it represents the construct
as he defines it.
Two general qualifications are in order with reference to the methodological
principles 1–6 set forth at the beginning of this section. Both of them concern
the amount of “theory,” in any high-level sense of that word, which enters into a
construct-defining network of laws or lawlike statements. We do not wish to
convey the impression that one always has a very elaborate theoretical network,
rich in hypothetical processes or entities.
Constructs as inductive summaries. In the early stages of development of a
construct or even at more advanced stages when our orientation is thoroughly
practical, little or no theory in the usual sense of the word need be involved. In
the extreme case the hypothesized laws are formulated entirely in terms of
descriptive (observational) dimensions although not all of the relevant observations have actually been made.
The hypothesized network “goes beyond the data” only in the limited sense
that it purports to characterize the behavior facets which belong to an
observable but as yet only partially sampled cluster; hence, it generates
predictions about hitherto unsampled regions of the phenotypic space. Even
though no unobservables or high-order theoretical constructs are introduced, an
element of inductive extrapolation appears in the claim that a cluster including
some elements not-yet-observed has been identified. Since, as in any sorting or
abstracting task involving a finite set of complex elements, several
nonequivalent bases of categorization are available, the investigator may choose
a hypothesis which generates erroneous predictions. The failure of a supposed,
hitherto untried, member of the cluster to behave in the manner said to be
characteristic of the group, or the finding that a nonmember of the postulated
cluster does behave in this manner, may modify greatly our tentative construct.
For example, one might build an intelligence test on the basis of his
background notions of “intellect,” including vocabulary, arithmetic calculation,
general information, similarities, two-point threshold, reaction time, and line
bisection as subtests. The first four of these correlate, and he extracts a huge first
factor. This becomes a second approximation of the intelligence construct,
described by its pattern of loadings on the four tests. The other three tests have
negligible loading on any common factor. On this evidence the investigator
reinterprets intelligence as “manipulation of words.” Subsequently it is

14

Lee J. Cronbach and Paul E. Meehl

discovered that test-stupid people are rated as unable to express their ideas, are
easily taken in by fallacious arguments, and misread complex directions. These
data support the “linguistic” definition of intelligence and the test’s claim of
validity for that construct. But then a block design test with pantomime instructions is found to be strongly saturated with the first factor. Immediately the
purely “linguistic” interpretation of Factor I becomes suspect. This finding,
taken together with our initial acceptance of the others as relevant to the background concept of intelligence, forces us to reinterpret the concept once again.
If we simply list the tests or traits which have been shown to be saturated
with the “factor” or which belong to the cluster, no construct is employed. As
soon as we even summarize the properties of this group of indicators—we are
already making some guesses. Intensional characterization of a domain is
hazardous since it selects (abstracts) properties and implies that new tests
sharing those properties will behave as do the known tests in the cluster, and that
tests not sharing them will not.
The difficulties in merely “characterizing the surface cluster” are strikingly
exhibited by the use of certain special and extreme groups for purposes of
construct validation. The Pd scale of MMPI was originally derived and crossvalidated upon hospitalized patients diagnosed “Psychopathic personality,
asocial and amoral type” (McKinley & Hathaway, 1944). Further research
shows the scale to have a limited degree of predictive and concurrent validity for
“delinquency” more broadly defined (Blair, 1950; Hathaway & Monachesi,
1953). Several studies show associations between Pd and very special
“criterion” groups which it would be ludicrous to identify as “the criterion” in
the traditional sense. If one lists these heterogeneous groups and tries to
characterize them intensionally, he faces enormous conceptual difficulties. For
example, a recent survey of hunting accidents in Minnesota showed that hunters
who had “carelessly” shot someone were significantly elevated on Pd when
compared with other hunters (Minnesota Hunter Casualty Study, 1954). This is
in line with one’s theoretical expectations; when you ask MMPI “experts” to
predict for such a group they invariably predict Pd or Ma or both. The finding
seems therefore to lend some slight support to the construct validity of the Pd
scale. But of course it would be nonsense to define the Pd component
“operationally” in terms of, say, accident proneness. We might try to subsume
the original phenotype and the hunting-accident proneness under some broader
category, such as “Disposition to violate society’s rules, whether legal, moral, or
just sensible.” But now we have ceased to have a neat operational criterion, and
are using instead a rather vague and wide-range class. Besides, there is worse to
come. We want the class specification to cover a group trend that (nondelinquent) high school students judged by their peer group as least
“responsible” score over a full sigma higher on Pd than those judged
most “responsible” (Gough, McClosky, & Meehl, 1952, p. 75). Most of the
behaviors contributing to such sociometric choices fall well within the range of
socially permissible action; the proffered criterion specification is still too
restrictive. Again, any clinician familiar with MMPI lore would predict an

Construct Validity

15

elevated Pd on a sample of (nondelinquent) professional actors. Chyatte’s
confirmation of this prediction (1949) tends to support both: (a) the theory
sketch of “what the Pd factor is, psychologically”; and (b) the claim of the Pd
scale to construct validity for this hypothetical factor. Let the reader try his hand
at writing a brief phenotypic criterion specification that will cover both triggerhappy hunters and Broadway actors! And if he should be ingenious enough to
achieve this, does his definition also encompass Hovey’s report that high Pd
predicts the judgments “not shy” and “unafraid of mental patients” made upon
nurses by their supervisors (1953, p. 143)? And then we have Gough’s report
that low Pd is associated with ratings as “good-natured” (Gough, McKee, &
Yandell, 1953, p. 40), and Roessell’s data showing that high Pd is predictive of
“dropping out of high school” (54). The point is that all seven of these
“criterion” dispositions would be readily guessed by any clinician having even
superficial familiarity with MMPI interpretation; but to mediate these inferences
explicitly requires quite a few hypotheses about dynamics, constituting an
admittedly sketchy (but far from vacuous) network defining the genotype
psychopathic deviate.
Vagueness of present psychological laws. This line of thought leads directly
to our second important qualification upon the network schema. The idealized
picture is one of a tidy set of postulates which jointly entail the desired
theorems; since some of the theorems are coordinated to the observation base,
the system constitutes an implicit definition of the theoretical primitives and
gives them an indirect empirical meaning. In practice, of course, even the most
advanced physical sciences only approximate this ideal. Questions of
“categoricalness” and the like, such as logicians raise about pure calculi, are
hardly even statable for empirical networks. (What, for example, would be the
desiderata of a “well-formed formula” in molar behavior theory?) Psychology
works with crude, half-explicit formulations. We do not worry about such
advanced formal questions as “whether all molar-behavior statements are decidable by appeal to the postulates” because we know that no existing theoretical
network suffices to predict even the known descriptive laws. Nevertheless, the
sketch of a network is there; if it were not, we would not be saying anything
intelligible about our constructs. We do not have the rigorous implicit definitions of formal calculi (which still, be it noted, usually permit of a multiplicity of
interpretations). Yet the vague, avowedly incomplete network still gives the
constructs whatever meaning they do have. When the network is very incomplete, having many strands missing entirely and some constructs tied in only by
tenuous threads, then the “implicit definition” of these constructs is disturbingly
loose; one might say that the meaning of the constructs is underdetermined.
Since the meaning of theoretical constructs is set forth by stating the laws in
which they occur, our incomplete knowledge of the laws of nature produces a
vagueness in our constructs (see Hempel, 1952; Kaplan, 1946; Pap, 1953). We
will be able to say “what anxiety is” when we know all of the laws involving it;
meanwhile, since we are in the process of discovering these laws, we do not yet
know precisely what anxiety is.

16

Lee J. Cronbach and Paul E. Meehl

Conclusions Regarding the Network after Experimentation
The proposition that x per cent of test variance is accounted for by the construct
is inserted into the accepted network. The network then generates a testable
prediction about the relation of the tests scores to certain other variables, and the
investigator gathers data. If prediction and result are in harmony, he can retain
his belief that the test measures the construct. The construct is at best adopted,
never demonstrated to be “correct.”
We do not first “prove” the theory, and then validate the test, nor conversely. In any probable inductive type of inference from a pattern of observations, we examine the relation between the total network of theory and
observations. The system involves propositions relating test to construct, construct to other constructs, and finally relating some of these constructs to
observables. In ongoing research the chain of inference is very complicated.
Kelly and Fiske (1951, p. 124) give a complex diagram showing the numerous
inferences required in validating a prediction from assessment techniques, where
theories about the criterion situation are as integral a part of the prediction as are
the test data. A predicted empirical relationship permits us to test all the
propositions leading to that prediction. Traditionally the proposition claiming to
interpret the test has been set apart as the hypothesis being tested, but actually
the evidence is significant for all parts of the chain. If the prediction is not
confirmed, any link in the chain may be wrong.
A theoretical network can be divided into subtheories used in making
particular predictions. All the events successfully predicted through a subtheory
are of course evidence in favor of that theory. Such a subtheory may be so well
confirmed by voluminous and diverse evidence that we can reasonably view a
particular experiment as relevant only to the test’s validity. If the theory,
combined with a proposed test interpretation, mispredicts in this case, it is the
latter which must be abandoned. On the other hand, the accumulated evidence
for a test’s construct validity may be so strong that an instance of misprediction
will force us to modify the subtheory employing the construct rather than deny
the claim that the test measures the construct.
Most cases in psychology today lie somewhere between these extremes.
Thus, suppose we fail to find a greater incidence of “homosexual signs” in the
Rorschach records of paranoid patients. Which is more strongly disconfirmed—
the Rorschach signs or the orthodox theory of paranoia? The negative finding
shows the bridge between the two to be undependable, but this is all we can say.
The bridge cannot be used unless one end is placed on solider ground. The
investigator must decide which end it is best to relocate.
Numerous successful predictions dealing with phenotypically diverse
“criteria” give greater weight to the claim of construct validity than do fewer
predictions, or predictions involving very similar behaviors. In arriving at
diverse predictions, the hypothesis of test validity is connected each time to a
subnetwork largely independent of the portion previously used. Success of these

Construct Validity

17

derivations testifies to the inductive power of the test-validity statement, and
renders it unlikely that an equally effective alternative can be offered.

Implications of Negative Evidence
The investigator whose prediction and data are discordant must make strategic
decisions. His result can be interpreted in three ways:
1. The test does not measure the construct variable.
2. The theoretical network which generated the hypothesis is incorrect.
3. The experimental design failed to test the hypothesis properly. (Strictly
speaking this may be analyzed as a special case of 2, but in practice the
distinction is worth making.)
For further research. If a specific fault of procedure makes the third a
reasonable possibility, his proper response is to perform an adequate study,
meanwhile making no report. When faced with the other two alternatives, he
may decide that his test does not measure the construct adequately. Following
that decision, he will perhaps prepare and validate a new test. Any rescoring or
new interpretative procedure for the original instrument, like a new test, requires
validation by means of a fresh body of data.
The investigator may regard interpretation 2 as more likely to lead to
eventual advances. It is legitimate for the investigator to call the network
defining the construct into question, if he has confidence in the test. Should the
investigator decide that some step in the network is unsound, he may be able to
invent an alternative network. Perhaps he modifies the network by splitting a
concept into two or more portions, e.g., by designating types of anxiety, or
perhaps he specifies added conditions under which a generalization holds. When
an investigator modifies the theory in such a manner, he is now required to
gather a fresh body of data to test the altered hypotheses. This step should
normally precede publication of the modified theory. If the new data are
consistent with the modified network, he is free from the fear that his
nomologicals were gerrymanderedavoid to fit the peculiarities of his first sample
of observations. He can now trust his test to some extent, because his test results
behave as predicted.
The choice among alternatives, like any strategic decision, is a gamble as to
which course of action is the best investment of effort. Is it wise to modify the
theory? That depends on how well the system is confirmed by prior data, and
how well the modifications fit available observations. Is it worth while to
modify the test in the hope that it will fit the construct? That depends on how
much evidence there is—apart from this abortive experiment—to support the
hope, and also on how much it is worth to the investigator’s ego to salvage the
test. The choice among alternatives is a matter of research planning.
For practical use of the test. The consumer can accept a test as a measure of
a construct only when there is a strong positive fit between predictions and
subsequent data. When the evidence from a proper investigation of a published
test is essentially negative, it should be reported as a stop sign to discourage use

18

Lee J. Cronbach and Paul E. Meehl

of the test pending a reconciliation of test and construct, or final abandonment of
the test. If the test has not been published, it should be restricted to research use
until some degree of validity is established (American Psychological
Association, 1953). The consumer can await the results of the investigator’s
gamble with confidence that proper application of the scientific method will
ultimately tell whether the test has value. Until the evidence is in, he has no
justification for employing the test as a basis for terminal decisions. The test
may serve, at best, only as a source of suggestions about individuals to be
confirmed by other evidence (Cronbach, 1955b; Meehl & Rosen, 1955).
There are two perspectives in test validation. From the viewpoint of the
psychological practitioner, the burden of proof is on the test. A test should not
be used to measure a trait until its proponent establishes that predictions made
from such measures are consistent with the best available theory of the trait. In
the view of the test developer, however, both the test and the theory are under
scrutiny. He is free to say to himself privately, “If my test disagrees with the
theory, so much the worse for the theory.” This way lies delusion, unless he
continues his research using a better theory.

Reporting of Positive Results
The test developer who finds positive correspondence between his proposed
interpretation and data is expected to report the basis for his validity claim.
Defending a claim of construct validity is a major task, not to be satisfied by a
discourse without data. The Technical Recommendations have little to say on
reporting of construct validity. Indeed, the only detailed suggestions under that
heading refer to correlations of the test with other measures, together with a
cross reference to some other sections of the report. The two key principles,
however, call for the most comprehensive type of reporting. The manual for any
test “should report all available information which will assist the user in
determining what psychological attributes account for variance in test scores”
(Technical Recommendations, 1954, p. 27). And, “The manual for a test which
is used primarily to assess postulated attributes of the individual should outline
the theory on which the test is based and organize whatever partial validity data
there are to show in what way they support the theory” (Technical Recommendations, 1954, p. 28). It is recognized, by a classification as “very desirable”
rather than “essential,” that in the latter recommendation goes beyond present
practice of test authors.
The proper goals in reporting construct validation are to make clear (a) what
interpretation is proposed, (b) how adequately the writer believes this interpretation is substantiated, and (c) what evidence and reasoning lead him to this
belief. Without a the construct validity of the test is of no use to the consumer.
Without b the consumer must carry the entire burden of evaluating the test
research. Without c the consumer or reviewer is being asked to take a and b on
faith. The test manual cannot always present an exhaustive statement on these

Construct Validity

19

points, but it should summarize and indicate where complete statements may be
found.
To specify the interpretation, the writer must state what construct he has in
mind, and what meaning he gives to that construct. For a construct which has a
short history and has built up few connotations, it will be fairly easy to indicate
the presumed properties of the construct, i.e., the nomologicals in which it
appears. For a construct with a longer history, a summary of properties and
references to previous theoretical discussions may be appropriate. It is especially
critical to distinguish proposed interpretations from other meanings previously
given the same construct. The validator faces no small task; he must somehow
communicate a theory to his reader.
To evaluate his evidence calls for a statement like the conclusions from a
program of research, noting what is well substantiated and what alternative
interpretations have been considered and rejected. The writer must note what
portions of his proposed interpretation are speculations, extrapolations, or conclusions from insufficient data. The author has an ethical responsibility to
prevent unsubstantiated interpretations from appearing as truths. A claim is
unsubstantiated unless the evidence for the claim is public, so that other
scientists may review the evidence, criticize the conclusions, and offer
alternative interpretations.
The report of evidence in a test manual must be as complete as any research
report, except where adequate public reports can be cited. Reference to something “observed by the writer in many clinical cases” is worthless as evidence.
Full case reports, on the other hand, may be a valuable source of evidence so
long as these cases are representative and negative instances receive due
attention. The report of evidence must be interpreted with reference to the
theoretical network in such a manner that the reader sees why the author regards
a particular correlation or experiment as confirming (or throwing doubt upon)
the proposed interpretation. Evidence collected by others must be taken fairly
into account.

Validation of a Complex Test “as a Whole”
Special questions must be considered when we are investigating the validity of a
test which is aimed to provide information about several constructs. In one
sense, it is naive to inquire “Is this test valid?” One does not validate a test, but
only a principle for making inferences. If a test yields many different types of
inferences, some of them can be valid and others invalid (cf. Technical
Recommendation C2: “The manual should report the validity of each type of
inference for which a test is recommended”). From this point of view, every
topic sentence in the typical book on Rorschach interpretation presents a
hypothesis requiring validation, and one should validate inferences about each
aspect of the personality separately and in turn, just as he would want information on the validity (concurrent or predictive) for each scale of MMPI.

20

Lee J. Cronbach and Paul E. Meehl

There is, however, another defensible point of view. If a test is purely
empirical, based strictly on observed connections between response to an item
and some criterion, then of course the validity of one scoring key for the test
does not make validation for its other scoring keys any less necessary. But a test
may be developed on the basis of a theory which in itself provides a linkage
between the various keys and the various criteria. Thus, while Strong’s
Vocational Interest Blank is developed empirically, it also rests on a “theory”
that a youth can be expected to be satisfied in an occupation if he has interests
common to men now happy in the occupation. When Strong finds that those
with high Engineering interests scores in college are preponderantly in engineering careers 19 years later, he has partly validated the proposed use of the
Engineer score (predictive validity). Since the evidence is consistent with the
theory on which all the test keys were built, this evidence alone increases the
presumption that the other keys have predictive validity. How strong is this
presumption? Not very, from the viewpoint of the traditional skepticism of
science. Engineering interests may stabilize early, while interests in art or
management or social work are still unstable. A claim cannot be made that the
whole Strong approach is valid just because one score shows predictive validity.
But if thirty interest scores were investigated longitudinally and all of them
showed the type of validity predicted by Strong’s theory, we would indeed by
caviling to say that this evidence gives no confidence in the long-range validity
of the thirty-first score.
Confidence in a theory is increased as more relevant evidence confirms it,
but it is always possible that tomorrow’s investigation will render the theory
obsolete. The “Technical Recommendations” suggest a rule of reason, and ask
for evidence for each type of inference for each type of inference for which a test
is recommended. It is stated that no test developer can present predictive
validities for all possible criteria; similarly, no developer can run all possible
experimental tests of his proposed interpretation. But the recommendation is
more subtle than advice that a lot of validation is better than a little.
Consider the Rorschach test. It is used for many inferences, made by means
of nomological networks at several levels. At a low level are the simple
unrationalized correspondences presumed to exist between certain signs and
psychiatric diagnoses. Validating such a sign does nothing to substantiate
Rorschach theory. For other Rorschach formulas an explicit a priori rationale
exists (for instance, high F percent interpreted as implying rigid control of
impulses). Each time such a sign shows correspondence with criteria, its
rationale is supported just a little. At a still higher level of abstraction, a considerable body of theory surrounds the general area of outer control, interlacing
many different constructs. As evidence cumulates, one should be able to decide
what specific inference-making chains within this system can be depended upon.
One should also be able to conclude—or deny—that so much of the system has
stood up under test that one has some confidence in even the untested lines in
the network.

Construct Validity

21

In addition to relatively delimited nomological networks surrounding
control or aspiration, the Rorschach interpreter usually has an overriding theory
of the test as a whole. This may be a psychoanalytic theory, a theory of perception and set, or a theory stated in terms of learned habit patterns. Whatever the
theory of the interpreter, whenever he validates an inference from the system, he
obtains some reason for added confidence in his overriding system. His total
theory is not tested, however, by experiments dealing with only one limited set
of constructs. The test developer must investigate far-separated, independent
sections of the network. The more diversified the predictions the system is
required to make, the greater confidence we can have that only minor parts of
the system will later prove faulty. Here we begin to glimpse a logic to defend the
judgment that the test and its whole interpretative system is valid at some level
of confidence.
There are enthusiasts who would conclude from the foregoing paragraphs
that since there is some evidence of correct, diverse predictions made from the
Rorschach, the test as a whole can be accepted as validated. This conclusion
overlooks the negative evidence. Just one finding contrary to expectation, based
on sound research, is sufficient to wash a whole theoretical structure away.
Perhaps the remains can be salvaged to form a new structure. But this structure
now must be exposed to fresh risks, and sound negative evidence will destroy it
in turn. There is sufficient negative evidence to prevent acceptance of the
Rorschach and its accompanying interpretative structures as a whole. So long as
any aspects of the overriding theory stated for the test have been disconfirmed,
this structure must be rebuilt.
Talk of areas and structures may seem not to recognize those who would
interpret the personality “globally.” They may argue that a test is best validated
in matching studies. Without going into detailed questions of matching methodology, we can ask whether such a study validates the nomological network “as a
whole.” The judge does employ some network in arriving at his conception of
his subject, integrating specific inferences from specific data. Matching studies,
if successful, demonstrate only that each judge’s interpretative theory has some
validity, that it is not completely a fantasy. Very high consistency between
judges is required to show that they are using the same network, and very high
success in matching is required to show that the network is dependable.
If inference is less than perfectly dependable, we must know which aspects
of the interpretative network are least dependable and which are most
dependable. Thus, even if one has considerable confidence in a test “as a whole”
because of frequent successful inferences, one still returns as an ultimate aim to
the request of the Technical Recommendation for separate evidence on the
validity of each type of inference to be made.

Recapitulation
Construct validation was introduced in order to specify types of research
required in developing tests for which the conventional views on validation are

22

Lee J. Cronbach and Paul E. Meehl

inappropriate. Personality tests, and some tests of ability, are interpreted in terms
of attributes for which there is no adequate criterion. This paper indicates what
sorts of evidence can substantiate such an interpretation, and how such evidence
is to be interpreted. The following points made in the discussion are particularly
significant.
1. A construct is defined implicitly by a network of associations or
propositions in which it occurs. Constructs employed at different stages of
research vary in definiteness.
2. Construct validation is possible only when some of the statements in the
network lead to predicted relations among observables. While some observables
may be regarded as “criteria,” the construct validity of the criteria themselves is
regarded as under investigation.
3. The network defining the construct, and the derivation leading to the
predicted observation, must be reasonably explicit so that validating evidence
may be properly interpreted.
4. Many types of evidence are relevant to construct validity, including
content validity, interitem correlations, intertest correlations, test-”criterion”
correlations, studies of stability over time, and stability under experimental
intervention. High correlations and high stability may constitute either favorable
or unfavorable evidence for the proposed interpretation, depending on the theory
surrounding the construct.
5. When a predicted relation fails to occur, the fault may lie in the proposed
interpretation of the test or in the network. Altering the network so that it can
cope with the new observations is, in effect, redefining the construct. Any such
new interpretation of the test must be validated by a fresh body of data before
being advanced publicly. Great care is required to avoid substituting a posteriori
rationalizations for proper validation.
6. Construct validity cannot generally be expressed in the form of a single
simple coefficient. The data often permit one to establish upper and lower
bounds for the proportion of test variance which can be attributed to the
construct. The integration of diverse data into a proper interpretation cannot be
an entirely quantitative process.
7. Constructs may vary in nature from those very close to “pure description”
(involving little more than extrapolation of relations among observation
variables) to highly theoretical constructs involving hypothesized entities and
processes, or making identifications with constructs of other sciences.
8. The investigation of a test’s construct validity is not essentially different
from the general scientific procedures for developing and confirming theories.
Without in the least advocating construct validity as preferable to the other
three kinds (concurrent, predictive, content), we do believe it imperative that
psychologists make a place for it in their methodological thinking, so that its
rationale, its scientific legitimacy, and its dangers may become explicit and
familiar. This would be preferable to the widespread current tendency to engage
in what actually amounts to construct validation research and use of constructs

Construct Validity

23

in practical testing, while talking an “operational” methodology which, if
adopted, would force research into a mold it does not fit.

References
American Psychological Association. (1953). Ethical standards of psychologists.
Washington, D.C.: Author.
Anastasi, A. (1950). The concept of validity in the interpretation of test scores. Educ.
psychol. Measmt, 10, 67-78.
Bechtoldt, H. P. (1951). Selection. In S. S. Stevens (Ed.), Handbook of experimental
psychology (pp. 1237-1267). New York: Wiley.
Beck, L. W. (1950). Constructions and inferred entities. Philosophy of Science, 17.
Reprinted in H. Feigl and M. Brodbeck (Eds.), Readings in the philosophy of science
(pp. 368-381). New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1953.
Blair, W. R. N. (1950). A comparative study of disciplinary offenders and non-offenders
in the Canadian Army. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 4, 49-62.
Braithwaite, R. B. (1953). Scientific explanation. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer. Press.
Carnap, R. (1939). Foundations of logic and mathematics. International encyclopedia of
unified science, 1(No. 3). Pages 56-69 reprinted as “The interpretation of physics” in
H. Feigl and M. Brodbeck (Eds.), Readings in the philosophy of science (pp. 309-318).
New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1953.
Carnap, R. (1950). Empiricism, semantics, and ontology. Révue Internationale de
Philosophie, 4, 20-40. [vol 4 or 2?] Reprinted in P. P. Wiener (Ed.), Readings in
philosophy of science (pp. 509-521), New York: Scribner's, 1953.
Child, I. L. (1954). Personality. Annual Review of Psychology, 5, 149-171.
Chyatte, C. (1949). Psychological characteristics of a group of professional actors.
Occupations, 27, 245-250.
Cronbach, L. J. (1949). Essentials of psychological testing. New York: Harper.
Cronbach, L. J. (1950). Further evidence on response sets and test design. Educ. psychol.
Measmt, 10, 3-31.
Cronbach, L. J. (1951). Coefficient alpha and the internal structure of tests.
Psychometrika, 16, 297-335.
Cronbach, L. J. (1955b). Processes affecting scores on "understanding of others" and
“assumed similarity.” Psychological Bulletin, 52, 177-193.
Cronbach, L. J. (1955a). The counselor's problems from the perspective of
communication theory. In Vivian H. Hewer (Ed.), New perspectives in counseling.
Minneapolis: Univer. of Minnesota Press.
Cureton, E. E. (1950). Validity. In E. F. Lindquist (Ed.), Educational measurement (pp.
621-695). Washington, D.C.: American Council on Education.
Damrin, D. E. (1952). A comparative study of information derived from a diagnostic
problem-solving test by logical and factorial methods of scoring. Unpublished doctor's
dissertation, Univer. of Illinois.
Eysenck, H. J. (1950). Criterion analysis—an application of the hypothetico-deductive
method in factor analysis. Psychological Review, 57, 38-53.
Feigl H. (1950a). Existential hypotheses Realistic versus phenomenalistic interpretations.
Philosophy of Science, 17, 35-62.
Feigl, H. (1951). Confirmability and confirmation. Revue Internationale de Philosophie,
5, 1-12. Reprinted in P. P. Wiener (Ed.), Readings in philosophy of science (pp. 522530). New York: Scribner's, 1953.

24

Lee J. Cronbach and Paul E. Meehl

Gaylord, R. H. (no date). Conceptual consistency and criterion equivalence: a dual
approach to criterion analysis. Unpublished manuscript (PRB Research Note No. 17).
Copies obtainable from ASTIA-DSC, AD-21 440.
Goodenough, F. L. (1950). Mental testing. New York: Rinehart.
Gough, H. G., McClosky, H., & Meehl, P. E. (1952). A personality scale for social
responsibility. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 47, 73-80.
Gough, H. G., McKee, M. G., & Yandell, R. J. (1953). Adjective check list analyses of a
number of selected psychometric and assessment variables. Institute of Personality
Assessment and Research. Berkeley: Univer. of California.
Guilford, J. P. (1946). New standards for test evaluation. Educ. psychol. Measmt. 6, 427439.
Guilford, J. P. (1948). Factor analysis in a test-development program. Psychological
Review, 55, 79-94.
Gulliksen, H. (1950). Intrinsic validity. American Psychologist, 5, 511-517.
Hathaway, S. R., & Monachesi, E. D. (1953). Analyzing and predicting juvenile
delinquency with the MMPI. Minneapolis: Univer. of Minnesota Press.
Hempel, C. G. (1950). Problems and changes in the empiricist criterion of meaning.
Révue Internationale de Philosophie, 4, 41-63. [should vol be II?] Reprinted in L.
Linsky, Semantics and the philosophy of language. Urbana: Univer. of Illinois Press,
1952. Pp. 163-185.
Hempel, C. G. (1952). Fundamentals of concept formation in empirical science. In
International Encyclopedia of Unified Science. Vol. II, No. 7. Chicago, IL: Univer. of
Chicago Press.
Horst, P. (1941) Prediction of personal adjustment (Bulletin No. 48). New York: Social
Sciences Research Council.
Hovey, H. B. (1953). MMPI profiles and personality characteristics. Journal of
Consulting Psychology, 17, 142-146.
Jenkins, J. G. (1946). Validity for what? Journal of Consulting Psychology, 10, 93-98.
Kaplan, A. (1946). Definition and specification of meaning. Journal of Philosophy, 43,
281-287.
Kelly, E. L. (1954) Theory and techniques of assessment. Annual Review of Psychology,
5, 281-311.
Kelly, E. L., & Fiske, D. W. (1951). The prediction of performance in clinical
psychology. Ann Arbor: Univer. of Michigan Press.
Kneale, W. (1949). Probability and induction. Oxford: Clarendon Press. Pages 92-110
reprinted as “Induction, explanation, and transcendent hypotheses” in H. Feigl and M.
Brodbeck (Eds.), Readings in the philosophy of science. New York: Appleton-CenturyCrofts, 1953. Pp. 353-367.
Lindquist, E. F. (1950). Educational measurement. Washington, DC: American Council
on Education.
Lucas, C. M. (1953). Analysis of the relative movement test by a method of individual
interviews. Bur. Naval Personnel Res. Rep., Contract Nonr-694 (00), NR 151-13,
Educational Testing Service.
MacCorquodale, K., & Meehl, P. E. (1948). On a distinction between hypothetical
constructs and intervening variables. Psychological Review, 55, 95-107.
Macfarlane, J. W. (1942). Problems of validation inherent in projective methods.
American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 12, 405-410.
McKinley, J. C., & Hathaway, S. R. (1944). The MMPI: V. Hysteria, hypomania, and
psychopathic deviate. Journal of Applied Psychology, 28, 153-174.

Construct Validity

25

McKinley, J. C., Hathaway, S. R., & Meehl, P. E. (1948). The MMPI: VI. The K scale.
Journal of Consulting Psychology, 12, 20-31.
Meehl, P. E. (1945d). A simple algebraic development of Horst's suppressor variables.
American Journal of Psychology, 58, 550-554.
Meehl, P. E. (1945c). An investigation of a general normality or control factor in
personality testing. Psychological Monographs, 59, No. 4 (Whole No. 274).
Meehl, P. E. (1954a/1996). Clinical versus statistical prediction: a theoretical analysis
and a review of the evidence. Minneapolis, MN: Univer. of Minnesota Press.
[Reprinted with new Preface, 1996, by Jason Aronson, Northvale, NJ.]
Meehl, P. E. & Rosen, (1955). A. Antecedent probability and the efficiency of
psychometric signs, patterns, or cutting scores. Psychological Bulletin, 52, 194-216.
Minnesota Hunter Casualty Study. (1954). St. Paul: Jacob Schmidt Brewing Co.
Mosier, C. I. (1947) A critical examination of the concepts of face validity. Educ.
psychol. Measmt, 7, 191-205.
Mosier, C. I. (1951). Problems and designs of cross-validation. Educ. psychol. Measmt,
11, 5-12.
Pap, A. (1953). Reduction-sentences and open concepts. Methodos, 5, 3-30.
Peak, H. (1953). Problems of objective observation. In L. Festinger and D. Katz (Eds.),
Research methods in the behavioral sciences. New York: Dryden Press. Pp. 243-300.
Porteus, S. D. (1950). The Porteus maze test and intelligence. Palo Alto: Pacific Books.
Roessel, F. P. (1954). MMPI results for high school drop-outs and graduates.
Unpublished doctor's dissertation, Univer. of Minnesota.
Sellars, W. S. (1948). Concepts as involving laws and inconceivable without them.
Philosophy of Science, 15, 287-315.
Sellars, W. S. (1954). Some reflections on language games. Philosophy of Science, 21,
204-228.
Spiker, C. C., & McCandless, B. R. (1954). The concept of intelligence and the
philosophy of science. Psychological Review, 61, 255-267.
Technical recommendations for psychological tests and diagnostic techniques. (1954).
Psychological Bulletin Supplement, 51, 2, Part 2, 1-38.
Technical recommendations for psychological tests and diagnostic techniques:
preliminary proposal. (1952). American Psychologist, 7, 461-476.
Thurstone, L. L. (1952). The criterion problem in personality research. Psychometric
Lab. Rep., No. 78. Chicago: Univer. of Chicago Press.

Index
Acceptance
essential in construct validation, 2
involved in construct validity, 13
of set of operations as definitive, 2
American Psychological Association
Committee on Test Standards, 1
Behavior
admissible constructs must be relevant
to, 12
Binet scale
as example of "bootstraps" effect, 7
Bootstraps effect, 7

Change over occasions
in construct validation, 9
Complex test
extrapolation to score's validity from
construct validity of other scores, 20
inferring construct validity from overall theory used in construction
being supported, 20
validated “as a whole”, 19
Concepts
splitting, to explain invalidity, 17

26

Lee J. Cronbach and Paul E. Meehl

Concurrent validity
defined, 2
Congruent validity. See Construct validity
Construct
accounting for variance in test
performance, 2
as inductive summary, 13
evidenced by but not identical with
performance, 7
identified with constructs in other
sciences, 4
implicit definition by nomological net, 11
kinds of, 4
loosely defined by incomplete network,
15
never demonstrated to be "correct", 16
not "reduced" to observations, 11
postulated attribute of people, 4
relation to "criteria", 5
splitting, to explain invalidity, 17
Construct saturations
rarely can be definitely estimated, 10
upper and lower bounds on, 10
Construct validation
“global” approach to, 21
actually used despite
“operational”method claimed, 22
logic of, 11
matching studies of, 21
of complex text “as a whole”, 19
procedure, anxiety test as example, 3
strand in theoretical network, 16
Construct validation"bootstraps effect", 7
Construct validity. Chapter 1 passim
chief innovation of APA Test
Standares Committee, 1
conclusions after experimentation, 16
experimentation to investigate, 8
gerrymandering to preserve, 17
numerical estimates of, 10
operational definition lacking, 2
practical use of test, 17
recapitulation of theses, 21
reporting positive results, 18
similar or related ideas in earlier
literature, 1
supports theory and conversely, 16
Content validity
defined, 2
work sample as instance, 2

Correlation
matrices, method of construct
validation, 8
Criteria
diverse, support construct validity
more than similar behaviors, 16
Criterion
critical view of implied in construct
validity, 5
sometimes no more valid than test, 5
validation procedures oriented to, 1
Criterion analysis
Eysenck’s use in factor analysis for
construct validation, 8
Domain
characterized intensionally, an
extrapolative construct claim, 14
Empirical validity, 1
Evidence
negative, implications for construct
validity, 17
Extrapolation
low-order construct, 13
Face validity, 1
Factor analysis
method of construct validation, 8

Factorial validity, 1
Factors
regarded as "real dimensions" with
surplus meaning, 8
surplus meaning of, 8
Generality
desired by practical user of test, 6
Gerrymandering
of data to preserve theory, 17

“Global” interpretation
matching studies, 21
Group differences
method of construct validation, 8
“Holistic” validation of complex test, 19
Homogeneity
as method of construct validation, 9
Intelligence
“bootstraps” effect in validation from
teacher ratings, 7
example of shift in meaning of
summary construct, 13
Internal consistency
as validity criterion (Thurstone), 3

Construct Validity
may lower validity, 9
Internal entities
clinical test user wishes to infer, 5
involved in construct-validity
approach, 7
Internal structure
method of construct validation, 9
Intrinsic validity
related to construct validity, 1
Items
universe of, in content validity, 2
Kinetic theory
in construct validation of thermometer, 7
Law network
defines constructs implicitly, 11
Logical validity, 1
Matching method
very high success required to support
network, 21
Matching studies
in “global” interpretation, 21
MMPI
psychopathic deviate scale example of
construct validation by multiple
evidence, 14
Multivariate test
extrapolation to score’s validity from
construct validity of other scores, 20
inferring construct validity from overall theory used in test-construction
being supported, 20
Negative evidence
gerrymandering to avoid, 17
implications for construct validity, 17
three interpretations possible, 17
Nomological network
conclusions after experimentation, 16
construct validity in, 11
refuted by one negative finding, 21
Null hypothesis
rejection does not finish construct
validation process, 11
Observation
constructs remote from but admissible, 11
Operational approach
defended, 6
using many specific criteria, 6
Operational definition
sometimes appropriate, 5
Operational methodology

27

claimed when not used, 22
forcing research into mold, 22
Performance
evidence for construct but distinct
from it, 7
Philosophy of science
in construct validation, 11
Postulate system
constitutes implicit definition of
theoretical primitives, 15
Prediction(s)
diverse, yield more confidence in
network, 21
Predictive validity
defined, 2
Process
studies of, as method of construct
validation, 10
Projective techniques
multiple methods of validation, 8
suggested need for construct-validity
idea, 1
Psychiatric ratings
as criteria, 5
Rorschach
levels of inference from, 20
Sample
tests as, 1
Sign
tests as, 1
Specific criteria
in operational approach, 6
inadequacy of validation, 6
used temporarily, 7
Stability
bearing on construct validation, 9
Summaries of data
one kind of construct, 13
Suppressor variables, 9
Surplus meaning
of factors, 8
Teacher judgments
in construct validation of Binet scale, 7
Technical recommendations
report of APA Test Standards
Committee, 1
Temperature
as example of “bootstraps” effect, 7
as example of construct validation, 7

28

Lee J. Cronbach and Paul E. Meehl

test operations differ but indicate same
construct, 12
Test manual
reports all available information, 18
theory of construct should be outlined, 18
Test Standards
APA Committee on, 1
Test(s)
author’s ethical responsibility
concerning interpretations, 19
complex, validated “as a whole”, 19
sometimes as valid as available criteria, 5
Theoretical constructs
meaning given by laws they occur in, 15
Theoretical network
divisible into subtheories, 16
gerrymandering tactic, 17

Theoretical structure
refutable by single contrary finding, 21

Theory(ies)
testing of does not precede or follow
construct validation, 16
Universe of items
in content validity, 2
Vague concept
start of construct validation, 7
Vagueness
of psychological laws, 15
Validation
criterion-oriented procedures, 1
four types of, 1

Validity
empirical, 1
face, 1
factorial, 1
generalization, 1
logical, 1
Work sample
example of content validity, 2

