MEASUREMENT OF CHARACTER.
I DO not plead guilty to taking a shallow view of human nature,
when I propose to apply, as it were, a foot-rule to its heights and
depths. The powers of man are finite, and if finite they are
not too large for measurement. Those persons may justly be
accused of shallowness of view, who do not discriminate a wide
range of differences, but quickly lose all sense of proportion, and
rave about infinite heights and unfathomable depths, and use such
like expressions which are not true and betray their incapacity.
Examiners are not, I believe, much stricken with the sense of awe
and infinitude when they apply their foot-rules to the intellectual
performances of the candidates whom they examine ; neither do I see
any reason why we should be awed at the thought of examining our
fellow creatures as best we may, in respect to other faculties than
intellect. On the contrary, I think it anomalous that the art of
measuring intellectual faculties should have become highly deve
loped, while that of dealing with other qualities should have been
little practised or even considered.
The use of measuring man in his entirety, is to be justified by
exactly the same arguments as those by which any special examin
ations are justified, such as those in classics or mathematics ; namely,
that every measurement tests, in some particulars, the adequacy of the
previous education, and contributes to show the efficiency of the man
as a human machine, at the time it was made. It is impossible to be
sure of the adequacy in every respect of the rearing of a man, or of
his total efficiency, unless he has been measured in character and
physique, as well as in intellect. A wise man. desires this knowledge
for his own use, and for the same reason that he takes stock from
time to time of his finances. It teaches him his position among his
fellows, and whether he is getting on or falling back, and ho shapes
his ambitions and conduct accordingly. "Know thyself" is an
ancient phrase of proverbial philosophy, and I wish to discuss ways
by which its excellent direction admits of being better followed.
The art of measuring various human faculties now occupies the
attention of many inquirers in this and other countries. Shelves full
of memoirs have been written in Germany alone, 011 the discrimi
native powers of the various senses. New processes of inquiry are
yearly invented, and it seems as though there was a general
lightening up of the sky in front of the path of the anthropometric
experimenter, which betokens the approaching dawn of a new and
interesting science. Can we discover landmarks in character to serve
as baees for a survey, or is it altogether too indefinite and fluctuating

180

JIEASUREMENT OF CHARACTEE.

to admit of measurement ? Is it liable to spontaneous changes, or to
be in any way affected by a caprice that renders the future necessarily
uncertain ? Is man, with his power of choice and freedom of will, so
different from a conscious machine, that any proposal to measure his
moral qualities is based upon a fallacy ? If BO, it would be ridiculous
to waste thought on the matter, but if our temperament and charac
ter are durable realities, and persistent factors of our conduct, we
have no Proteus to deal with in either case, and our attempts to grasp
and measure them are reasonable.
I have taken pains, as some of my readers may be aware, to obtain
fresh evidence upon this question, which, in other words, is, whether
or no the actions of men are mainly governed by cause and effect.
On the supposition that they are so governed, it is as important to us
to learn the exact value of our faculties, as it is to know the driving
power of the engine and the quality of the machine that does our
factory-work. If, on the other hand, the conduct of man is mainly
the result of mysterious influences, such knowledge is of little service
to him. He must be content to look upon himself as on a ship,
afloat in a strong and unknown current, that may drift her in a very
different direction to that in which her head is pointed.
My earlier inquiries into this subject had reference to the facts of
heredity, and I came across frequent instances in which a son,
happening to inherit somewhat exclusively the qualities of his father,
had been found to fail with his failures, sin with his sins, surmount
with his virtues, and generally to get through life in much the same
way. The course of his life had, therefore, been predetermined by
his inborn faculties, or, to continue the previous metaphor, his ship
had not drifted, but pursued the course in which her head was set
until she arrived at her predestined port.
The second of my inquiries was into the life-histories of twins, in
the course of which I collected cases where the pair of twins
resembled each other so closely, that they behaved like one person,
thought and spoke alike, and acted similar parts when separated.
Whatever spontaneous feeling the one twin may have had, the other
twin at the very same moment must have had a spontaneous feelingof exactly the same kind. Such habitual coincidences, if they had
no common cause, would be impossible ; we are therefore driven to
the conclusion that whenever twins think and speak alike, there is
no spontaneity in either of them, in the popular acceptation of the
word, but that they act mechanically and in like ways, because their
mechanisms are alike. I need not reiterate my old arguments, and
will say no more about the twins, except that new cases have come
to my knowledge whieh corroborate former information. It follows,
that if we had in our keeping the twin of a man, who was hia
" double," we might obtain a trustworthy forecast of what the man

MEASUREMENT OF CHARACTER.

181

would do under any new conditions, by first subjecting that twin to
the same conditions and watching his conduct.
My third inquiry is more recent. It was a course of intro
spective search into the operations of my own mind, whenever I
caught myself engaged in a feat of what at first sight seemed to
be free-will. The inquiry was carried on almost continuously for
three weeks, and proceeded with, off and on, for many subsequent
months. After I had mastered the method of observation a
vast deal of apparent mystery cleared away, and I ultimately
reckoned the rate of occurrence of perplexing cases, during the
somewhat uneventful but pleasant months of a summer spent in
the country, to be less than one a day. All the rest of my actions
seemed clearly to lie within the province of normal cause and
consequence. The general results of my introspective inquiry
support the views of those who hold that man is little more than a
conscious machine, the larger part of whose actions are predicable.
As regards such residuum as there may be, which is not automatic,
and which a man, however wise and well informed, could not possibly
foresee, I have nothing to say, but I have found that the more careirdly I~inquired, whether it was into hereditary similarities of con
duct, into the life-histories of twins, or now introspectively into the
processes of what I should have called my own Free-Will, the
smaller seems the room left for the possible residuum.
I conclude from these three inquiries that the motives of the will
are mostly normal, and that the character which shapes our conduct
is a definite and durable " something," and therefore that it is
reasonable to attempt to measure it. We must guard ourselves
against supposing that the moral faculties which we distinguish by
different names, as courage, sociability, niggard ness, are separate
entities. On the contrary, they are so intermixed that they are
never singly in action. I tried to gain an idea of the number of
the more conspicuous aspects of the character by counting in an
appropriate dictionary the words used to express them. Eoget's
Thesaurus was selected for that purpose, and I examined many pages
of its index here and there as samples of the whole, and estimated
that it contained fully one thousand words expressive of character,
each of which has a separate shade of meaning, while each shares a
large part of its meaning with some of the rest.
It may seem hopeless to deal accurately with so vague and wide
a subject, but it often happens that when we are unable to meet
difficulties, we may evade them, and so it is with regard to the
present difficulty. It is true that we cannot define any aspect of
character, but we can define a test that shall elicit some manifestation
of character, and we can define the act performed in response to it.
Searchings into the character must be conducted on the same
vol. xxxvi. n.s.
o

182

MEASUREMENT OF CHARACTER.

fundamental principle as that which lies at the root of examinations
into the intellectual capacity. Here there has been no preliminary
attempt to map out the field of intellect with accuracy ; but definite
tests are selected by which the intellect is probed at places that are
roughly known but not strictly defined, as the depth of a lake might
be sounded from a boat rowing here and there. So it should be
with respect to character. Definite acts in response to definite
emergencies have alone to be noted. No accurate map of character
is required to start from.
Emergencies need not be waited for, they can be extemporised ;
traps, as it were, can be laid. Thus, a great ruler whose word can
make or mar a subject's fortune, wants a secret agent and tests his
character during a single interview. He contrives by a few minutes'
questioning, temptation, and show of displeasure, to turn his character
inside out, exciting in turns his hopes, fear, zeal, loyalty, ambition,
and so forth. Ordinary observers who stand on a far lower pedestal,
cannot hope to excite the same tension and outburst of feeling in
those whom they examine, but they can obtain good data in a more
leisurely way. If they are unable to note a man's conduct under
great trials for want of opportunity, they may do it in small ones, and
it is well that those small occasions should be such as are of frequent
occurrence, that the statistics of men's conduct under like conditions
may be compared. After fixing upon some particular class of persons
of similar age, sex, and social condition, we have to find out what
common incidents in their lives are most apt to make them betray
their character. We may then take note as often as we can, of
. what they do on these occasions, so as to arrive at their statistics of
conduct in a limited number of well-defined small trials.
One of the most notable differences between man and man, lies in
the emotional temperament. Some persons are quick and excitable ;
others are slow and deliberate. A sudden excitement, call, touch,
gesture, or incident of any kind evokes, in different persons, a response
that varies in intensity, celerity, and quality. An observer watching
children, heart and soul at their games, would soon collect enough
material to enable him to class them according to the quantity of
emotion that they showed. I will not attempt to describe particular
games of children or of others, nor to suggest experiments, more or
less comic, that might be secretly made to elicit the manifestations
we seek, as many such will occur to ingenious persons. They exist
in abundance, and I feel sure that if two or three experimenters were
to act zealously and judiciously together as secret accomplices, they
would soon collect abundant statistics of conduct. They would
gradually simplify their test conditions and extend their scope,
learning to probe character more quickly and from more of its sides.
It is a question by no means to be decided off-hand in the nega

MEASUREMENT OF CHARACTER.

183

tive, whether instrumental measurements of the magnitude of the
reflex signs of emotion in persons who desire to submit themselves to
experiment, are not feasible. The difficulty lies in the more limitedrange of tests that can be used when the freedom of movement is
embarrassed by the necessary mechanism. The exciting cause of
emotion whatever it be, a fright, a suspense, a scold, an insult, a
grief, must be believed to be genuine, or the tests would be worth
less. It is not possible to sham emotion thoroughly. A good actor
may move his audience as deeply as if they were witnessing a drama
of real life, but the best actor cannot put himself into the exact frame
of mind of a real sufferer. If he did, the reflex and automatic signs
of emotion excited in his frame would be so numerous and violent,
that they would shatter his constitution long before he had acted a
dozen tragedies.
The reflex signs of emotion that are perhaps the most easily regis
tered, are the palpitations of the heart. They cannot be shammed
or repressed, and they are visible. Our poet Laureate has happily
and artistically exemplified this. He tells us that Launcelot return
ing to court after a long illness through which he had been nursed
by Elaine, sent to crave an audience of the jealous queen. The
messenger utilises the opportunity for observing her in the following
ingenious way like a born scientist.
" Low drooping till he well nigh kissed her feet
For loyal awe, saw with a sidelong eye
The shadow of a piece of pointed lace
In the Queen's shadow, vibrate on the wall
And parted, laughing in his courtly heart."

Physiological experimenters are not content to look at shadows on
the wall, that depart and leave no mark. They obtain durable traces
by the aid of appropriate instruments. Maret's pretty little pneumocardiograph is very portable, but not so sure in action as the more
bulky apparatus. It is applied tightly to the chest in front of the
heart, by a band passing round the body. At each to-and-fro move
ment, whether of the chest as a whole, or of the portion over the
heart, it sucks in or blows out a little puff of air. A thin indiarubber tube connects its nozzle with a flat elastic bag under the
short arm of a lever. The other end of the lever moves up and down
in accordance with the part of the chest to which the pneumo-cardiograph is applied, and scratches light marks on a band of paper
which is driven onwards by clockwork. This little instrument can
be worn under the buttoned coat without being noticed. I was
anxious to practise myself in its use, and wore one during the for
midable ordeal of delivering the Rede Lecture in the Senate House at
Cambridge, a month ago (most of this very memoir forming part of
that lecture). I had no connection established between my instru
o2

184

MEASUREMENT OF CHARACTEB.

incut and any recording apparatus, but wore it merely to see whether
or no it proved in any way irksome. If I had had a table in
front of me, with the recording apparatus stowed out of sight
below, and an expert assistant near at hand to turn a stop-cock at
appropriate moments, he could have obtained samples of my heart's
action without causing me any embarrassment whatever. I should
have forgotten all about the apparatus while I was speaking.
,
Instrumental observers of the reflex signs of emotion have other
means available besides this, and the sphygmograph that measures
the pulse. Every twitch of each separate finger even of an infant's
hand is registered by Dr. Warner's ingenious little gauntlet. Every
movement of each limb of man or horse is recorded by Dr. Maret.
The apparatus of Mosso measures the degree in which the blood
leaving the extremities rushes to the heart and head and internal
organs. Every limb shrinks sensibly in volume from this with
drawal of the blood, and the shrinkage of any one of them, say the right
arm, is measured by the fall of water in a gauge that communicates
with a long bottleful of water, through the neck of which the arm
has been thrust, and in which it is softly but effectually plugged.
I should not be surprised if the remarkable success of many persons
in " muscle-reading " should open out a wide field for delicate instru
mental investigations. The poetical metaphors of ordinary language
suggest many possibilities of measurement. Thus when two persons
have an "inclination" to one another, they visibly incline or slope toge
ther when sitting side by side, as at a dinner-table, and they then throw
the stress of their weights on the near legs of their chairs. It does
not require much ingenuity to arrange a pressure gauge with an
index and dial to indicate changes in stress, but it is difficult to
devise an arrangement that shall fulfil the threefold condition of
being effective, not attracting notice, and being applicable to ordinary
furniture. I made some rude experiments, but being busy with
other matters, have not carried them on, as I had hoped.
Another conspicuous way in which one person differs from another
is in temper. Some men are easily provoked, others remain cheerful
even when affairs go very contrary to their liking. We all know
specimens of good and bad-tempered persons, and all of us could
probably specify not a few appropriate test conditions to try the
temper in various ways, and elicit definite responses. There is no
doubt that the temper of a dog can be tested. Many boys do it
habitually, and learn to a nicety how much each will put up with,
without growling or showing other signs of resentment. They do
the same to one another, and gauge each other's tempers accurately.
It is difficult to speak of tests of character without thinking of
Benjamin Franklin's amusing tale of the " Handsome and the
Deformed Leg," and there is no harm in quoting it, because, however

MEASUREMENT OF CHARACTER.

185

grotesque, it exemplifies the principle of tests. In it he describes
two sorts of people ; those who habitually dwell on the pleasanter
circumstances of the moment, and those who have no eyes but for
the unpleasing ones. He tells how a philosophical friend took
special precautions to avoid those persons who being discontented
themselves, sour the pleasures of society, offend many people, and
make themselves everywhere disagreeable. In order to discover a
pessimist at first sight, he cast about for an instrument. He of
course possessed a thermometer to test heat, and a barometer to tell
the air-pressure, but he had no instrument to test the characteristic
of which we are speaking. After much pondering he hit upon a
happy idea. He chanced to have one remarkably handsome leg, and
one that by some accident was crooked and deformed, and these he
used for the purpose. If a stranger regarded his ugly leg more than
his handsome one he doubted him. If he spoke of it and took no
notice of the handsome leg, the philosopher determined to avoid his
further acquaintance. Franklin sums up by saying, that every one
has not this two-legged instrument, but every one with a little
attention may observe the signs of a carping and fault-finding
disposition.
This very disposition is the subject of the eighteenth " character "
of Theophrastus, who describes the conduct of such men under the
social conditions of the day, one of which is also common to our
own time and countrymen. He says that when the weather has
been very dry for a long time, and it at last changes, the grumbler
being unable to complain of the rain, complains that it did not come
sooner. The British philosopher has frequent opportunities for
applying weather tests to those whom he meets, and with especial
fitness to such as happen to be agriculturists.
The points I have endeavoured to impress are chiefly these.
First, that character ought to be measured by carefully recorded
acts, representative of the usual conduct. An ordinary generalisa
tion is nothing more than a muddle of vague memories of inexact
observations. It is an easy vice to generalise. We want lists of
facts, every one of which may be separately verified, valued and
revalued, and the whole accurately summed. It is the statistics of
each man's conduct in small every-day affairs, that will probably be
found to give the simplest and most precise measure of his character.
The other chief point that I wish to impress is, that a practice of
deliberately and methodically testing the character of others and of
ourselves is not wholly fanciful, but deserves consideration and
experiment.
Francis Galton.

