XXX10.1177/1745691619861372Günther et al.Vector-Space Models From a Cognitive Perspective
research-article2019

ASSOCIATION FOR

PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE

Vector-Space Models of Semantic
Representation From a Cognitive
Perspective: A Discussion of Common
Misconceptions

Perspectives on Psychological Science
2019, Vol. 14(6) 1006­–1033
© The Author(s) 2019
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691619861372
DOI:
10.1177/1745691619861372
www.psychologicalscience.org/PPS

Fritz Günther1 , Luca Rinaldi1,2, and Marco Marelli1,2

1
Department of Psychology, University of Milano–Bicocca, and 2NeuroMI, Milan Center
for Neuroscience, Milan, Italy

Abstract
Models that represent meaning as high-dimensional numerical vectors—such as latent semantic analysis (LSA),
hyperspace analogue to language (HAL), bound encoding of the aggregate language environment (BEAGLE), topic
models, global vectors (GloVe), and word2vec—have been introduced as extremely powerful machine-learning
proxies for human semantic representations and have seen an explosive rise in popularity over the past 2 decades.
However, despite their considerable advancements and spread in the cognitive sciences, one can observe problems
associated with the adequate presentation and understanding of some of their features. Indeed, when these models
are examined from a cognitive perspective, a number of unfounded arguments tend to appear in the psychological
literature. In this article, we review the most common of these arguments and discuss (a) what exactly these models
represent at the implementational level and their plausibility as a cognitive theory, (b) how they deal with various
aspects of meaning such as polysemy or compositionality, and (c) how they relate to the debate on embodied and
grounded cognition. We identify common misconceptions that arise as a result of incomplete descriptions, outdated
arguments, and unclear distinctions between theory and implementation of the models. We clarify and amend these
points to provide a theoretical basis for future research and discussions on vector models of semantic representation.
Keywords
distributional semantic models, semantic representations, latent semantic analysis, computational models of meaning,
semantic memory
Computationally implemented theories of human
semantic representations, in which word meanings are
represented as high-dimensional numerical vectors
extracted from large amounts of natural-language data,
appeared in the field of cognitive science about 20
years ago. The most prominent early models in the field
were latent semantic analysis (LSA; Landauer & Dumais,
1997) and the hyperspace analogue to language (HAL;
Lund & Burgess, 1996). These models and their successors, such as bound encoding of the aggregate language
environment (BEAGLE; Jones & Mewhort, 2007), topic
models (Griffiths, Steyvers, & Tenenbaum, 2007), or, more
recently, global vectors (GloVe; Pennington, Socher, &
Manning, 2014) and word2vec (Mikolov, Chen, Corrado,
& Dean, 2013; Mikolov, Sutskever, Chen, Corrado, &
Dean, 2013), have received considerable attention, both

as applied models for word-meaning induction and as
the focus of investigation in cognitive science. An overview of these models is provided in Table 1.
These word-vector models have been shown to be
impressively high-performing: For example, they have
achieved perfect scores on multiple-choice tests (Bullinaria
& Levy, 2012), above 95% purity in word categorizations
(Baroni & Lenci, 2010), and correlations around .8 with
human word-similarity ratings—a score comparable to
human interrater agreements (Baroni, Dinu, & Kruszewski,
2014; Bruni, Tran, & Baroni, 2014). Therefore, they have
Corresponding Author:
Fritz Günther, Department of Psychology, University of Milano–
Bicocca, Piazza dell’Ateneo Nuovo, 20126 Milan, Italy
E-mail: fritz.guenther@unimib.it

Vector-Space Models From a Cognitive Perspective

1007

Table 1. The Most Prominent Vector Models of Semantic Representation
Model

References

Venue of publication

Description

HAL
LSA

Lund & Burgess (1996)
Landauer & Dumais (1997)

Behavior Research Methods
Psychological Review

Topic models

Griffiths, Steyvers, &
Tenenbaum (2007)
Jones & Mewhort (2007)

Psychological Review

Mikolov, Chen, Corrado, &
Dean (2013); Mikolov,
Sutskever, Chen, Corrado,
& Dean (2013)
Pennington, Socher, &
Manning (2014)

ICLR Workshop, Neural
Information Processing
Systems

Creates a word-by-word matrix
Creates a word-by-document matrix and
applies dimensionality reduction via SVD
Creates a word-by-document matrix and
applies dimensionality reduction via LDA
Modifies initially random word vectors
based on the other words in successively
processed documents
Trains word vectors as the hidden layer
of a neural network that predicts words
from the surrounding words or vice
versa
Trains word vectors to optimally predict
words’ probability of co-occurrence

BEAGLE

word2vec

GloVe

Psychological Review

Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing

Note: More detailed descriptions are provided in the text. BEAGLE = bound encoding of the aggregate language environment; GloVe = global
vectors; HAL = hyperspace analogue to language; LDA = latent Dirichlet allocation; LSA = latent semantic analysis; SVD = singular value
decomposition.

been successfully applied in virtually all fields of cognitive
science, including artificial intelligence research (see
Turney & Pantel, 2010), computational psychology (see
Jones, Willits, & Dennis, 2015), psycholinguistics (e.g.,
Jones, Kintsch, & Mewhort, 2006), cognitive neuroscience
(e.g., T. M. Mitchell et al., 2008), instructional design and
education (e.g., Wade-Stein & Kintsch, 2004), social psychology (e.g., Lenton, Sedikides, & Bruder, 2009), psychiatry (e.g., Elvevåg, Foltz, Weinberger, & Goldberg, 2007),
and biomedicine (e.g., Cohen & Widdows, 2009).
These models have accordingly had a significant
impact: As of the time of this writing (April 2019), the
article by Landauer and Dumais (1997) on the LSA
model has been cited almost 6,400 times on Google
Scholar, the article by Lund and Burgess (1996) on the
HAL model about 1,700 times, and the more recent
GloVe model (Pennington et al., 2014) almost 7,100
times, with the citations per year steadily increasing.
With the advent of neural-network–based models, most
prominently the word2vec model (Mikolov, Chen, et al.,
2013; Mikolov, Sutskever, et al., 2013), this trend was
accelerated even more—in fact, the articles by Mikolov,
Chen, et al. (2013) and Mikolov, Sutskever, et al. (2013)
have already by far surpassed the original articles on
the LSA and HAL models in total citations (currently
about 10,000 and 12,000, respectively). Given the success of these models, in terms of performance as well
as scientific impact, it is very likely that this trend will
explode in the near future.
Furthermore, while working with these models at
first required considerable amounts of technical knowledge, applications based on them have become far
more accessible over the years. A critical milestone in
this development was the release of the LSA website

(http://lsa.colorado.edu; see Dennis, 2007), which
allows one to obtain similarity metrics from LSA models.
In addition, different pieces of software have recently
been released that allow relatively easy access to
vector-model-based computations (e.g., Dinu, Pham, &
Baroni, 2013; Günther, Dudschig, & Kaup, 2015;
Mandera, Keuleers, & Brysbaert, 2017; Pennington
et al., 2014; Řehůřek & Sojka, 2010; Shaoul & Westbury,
2010). Given these circumstances, it is therefore critical
that these models are properly represented and understood by the scientific community, both from a theoretical and methodological perspective. As stated on the
LSA homepage: “It is essential [emphasis in original]
that you understand the LSA modeling methods before
using the applications on this website.”
However, the need to summarize these models for
clear, accessible communication to a general readership
and the rhetorical demand to highlight specific aspects
to make arguments or counterarguments have at times
led to some rather superficial or incomplete portrayals
in the psychological literature. This is especially true
from a theoretical perspective. In work not directly
focused on word-vector models, they have often been
contrasted with allegedly differing theoretical views.
For example, in work on the psychological structure of
concepts, they are at times introduced as “black-box”
models with abstract, noninterpretable dimensional values (e.g., Jones & Mewhort, 2007), whereas in work on
embodied and grounded cognition they are depicted
as language-centric, purely symbolic models of meaning (e.g., Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002; Glenberg &
Robertson, 2000).1 In the context of the specific claims
and arguments such studies want to endorse, these
references to vector-based models can be appropriate

1008
and justified. However, when directed at a general audience that is not necessarily familiar with the large body
of specialized literature on these word-vector models,
this can lead to misrepresentations and snap judgments
that repeatedly crop up in discussions on and assessments of vector-space models as cognitive theories and
the research based on them. In the remainder of this
article, we refer to these misrepresentations and judgments using the term misconceptions. However, we
want to stress that by using this term we are not implying that the literature on distributional semantic models
(DSMs) is full of errors. We rather refer to portrayals of
DSMs that can lead to misconceptions on the side of
the readers of such work and in secondary literature.
Apart from that, some claims have been made that
were completely accurate at their time and for the models as presented in the original proposals (Landauer &
Dumais, 1997; Lund & Burgess, 1996) but have since
been addressed or resolved in extensions or newer
models. However, if the initial critical claims appeared
in influential articles, they tend to stick in the debate,
especially for a general audience that will not necessarily be reached by new technical developments in
research explicitly focused on word-vector models.
Thus, when earlier claims are taken at face value without considering more recent research, progress in the
scientific debate will be hindered.
This phenomenon is further amplified by a rift in the
research on word-vector models that is largely split
between the fields of machine learning and naturallanguage processing on the one hand (more oriented
toward model development, language engineering, and
artificial intelligence applications) and cognitive psychology on the other (more oriented toward understanding the human cognitive system, predicting human
behavior, and applying measures derived from the models as proxies for cognitive variables), with relatively
little communication between the two fields. As a consequence, modeling advancements are sometimes
designed as engineering solutions without an awareness of theoretical debates in cognitive science. However, insights from cognitive theory can serve as a
highly valuable tool for model building because the
human cognitive system often excels in the very tasks
that language engineering tries to solve. On the other
hand, the theoretical importance of modeling advancements can be overlooked, especially when they are
conceived in nonpsychological fields. As a consequence, theory building in cognitive science will be
hindered if such advancements in model building are
not considered, discussed, or interpreted.
As a result of these issues, certain arguments concerning vector models of meaning tend to be frequently
reported in the scientific discourse and are discussed

Günther et al.
and addressed quite regularly. Over time, such repetition in debates, without a critical assessment of the
actual models, their theoretical assumptions, and their
more recent advancements, will impede scientific progress. We therefore consider it profitable to collect these
arguments and to address them thoroughly. Thus, we
aim in the current article to provide a state-of-the-art
cognitive perspective on these models as theories of
human semantic representations. We refrain from delving too deeply into the technical details; readers interested in these aspects are referred to the literature cited
for the individual arguments. Excellent reviews in this
respect are provided by Sahlgren (2006), Turney and
Pantel (2010), Lenci (2008, 2018), Jones et al. (2015),
and Landauer, McNamara, Dennis, and Kintsch (2007).
In the next section, we first introduce word-vector
models in more detail, with a focus on their underlying
theoretical assumptions, before turning to a collection
of common misconceptions about them, which will be
discussed thoroughly.

Vector-Space Models as Distributional
Semantics
So far, we have treated models such as LSA, HAL, topic
models, GloVe, and word2vec as a collection of computationally implemented models of semantic representation. However, the commonality of these models goes
beyond them all representing meanings as highdimensional numerical vectors (often referred to as distributional vectors, word vectors, or word embeddings).
Actually, all of these models can be seen as specific
parametrizations of a unique generalized model built
on the same theoretical foundation, the distributional
hypothesis, according to which words with similar meanings tend to occur in similar contexts (Firth, 1957; Harris,
1954). Following this hypothesis, a correspondence (or,
in a more radical view, even an equivalence) therefore
exists between a word’s distribution over contexts and
its meaning (see also Landauer, 2007). In a strong reading of the distributional hypothesis (described in Lenci,
2008), the contexts in which a word is used not only
follow from its meaning (which corresponds to a weak
reading) but also determine that meaning.
The power of this hypothesis lies in the fact that
applying rigorous operationalizations of “context”
allows one to quantify a word’s distribution and hence,
following the distributional hypothesis, its meaning. A
very simple operationalization is to define context as
other words in the same sentence. For example, in the
segment Never gonna give you up, never gonna let you
down, the word give co-occurs two times in the context
of never, gonna, and you and one time in the context
of up, down, and let. The word’s distribution and

Vector-Space Models From a Cognitive Perspective
therefore its meaning are then represented as the
numerical vector (2, 2, 2, 1, 1, 1). If the same contexts
are considered for all words, the resulting vectors will
all populate a common vector space, the semantic space.
In realistic applications, in which the co-occurrence data
are collected from large corpora of natural text, of
course more than six different contexts are considered.
As a result, the vectors and semantic spaces end up
being high-dimensional. Common definitions of contexts are the documents (i.e., sentences, paragraphs, or
articles) in which a word occurs (Griffiths et al., 2007;
Landauer & Dumais, 1997) or other words within a
fixed-size window around it (Lund & Burgess, 1996;
Mikolov, Chen, et al., 2013; Mikolov, Sutskever, et al.,
2013; Pennington et al., 2014).
Hence, the described vector-space models all adhere
to this specific theoretical approach to meaning. As a
result, they are often referred to as distributional
semantic models, which is a collective term for these
models that we use throughout this article. Note that
this term carries with it a certain theoretical commitment in that it implicitly assumes the validity of the
distributional hypothesis (otherwise, the models would
only be distributional models without being semantic
models). However, as discussed throughout the article,
there are a number of arguments in favor of this
assumption that we believe sufficiently justifies the
adoption of this widely used term.

Literature Review
To collect the most common misconceptions about
DSMs, we reviewed the description of DSMs in the 1,000
most cited articles in the Web of Science database,
which themselves cited the original LSA article (Landauer
& Dumais, 1997), as of July 2018. These articles were
selected as being the most influential and bestestablished scientific works relying on or discussing
DSMs. Partly because of the indexing criteria of the Web
of Science, most of these articles belong to the domains
of “psychology (experimental)” (n = 672 articles) and
“psychology” (n = 231 articles), followed by “computer
science (artificial intelligence)” (n = 404 articles), and
“computer science (information systems)” (n = 192 articles) as well as “linguistics” (n = 251 articles).
These articles were then reviewed with respect to
their description or discussions of DSMs and findings
and results based on these models. We categorized the
most common misconceptions into three major topics,
each containing more specific subissues, that will constitute the main structure of the present article:
1.

The implementation of DSMs and the construction of distributional vectors, with a focus on

1009

2.

3.

why DSMs are implementations of a cognitive
theory rather than statistical tools;
Detailed aspects of meaning and information as
captured by distributional vectors, with a focus
on topics such as interpretability, polysemy, and
context-sensitivity; and
The role of nonlinguistic experience in DSMs.

Implementation of DSMs
We now turn to the first set of partial descriptions of
DSMs in the literature, which are concerned with the
exact nature of DSM representations. Alongside this,
we describe how traditional, count-based DSMs 2 such
as LSA, HAL, or GloVe are typically implemented (for
comprehensive overviews, see Lenci, 2018; Turney &
Pantel, 2010) and what type of information their word
vectors actually represent.

Do DSMs conceptualize meaning
similarity as word co-occurrences?
In some descriptions, DSMs are presented as (refined)
word co-occurrence measures (Barsalou, 1999; Dreyer
& Pulvermüller, 2018; French & Labiouse, 2002;
Goldberg, Perfetti, & Schneider, 2006; Lau, Goh, & Yap,
2018; McKoon & Ratcliff, 1998; Meteyard, Cuadrado,
Bahrami, & Vigliocco, 2012). For example, Dreyer and
Pulvermüller (2018) describe DSMs as “distributional
learning of word-word correlations from texts” (p. 66),
and Kowialiewski and Majerus (2018) explicitly use LSA
cosine similarities as a word co-occurrence measure,
stating that “LSA measures the extent to which two
words co-occur within similar contexts using large corpora” (p. 70). On a more theoretical level, French and
Labiouse (2002) criticize DSMs because they “take issue
with the claim that lexical co-occurrence alone can
capture real-world semantics” (p. 316).
It is true that actual word co-occurrences—or, more
precisely, word-context co-occurrences—form the database for DSMs. In traditional DSMs, the first step in the
implementation of the model is to construct a wordby-context matrix, either of the word-by-document format (Griffiths et al., 2007; Landauer & Dumais, 1997)
or the word-by-word format (Lund & Burgess, 1996).
The cell entries of such a matrix are these actual cooccurrence counts. However, DSMs represent word
meanings as distributional vectors and therefore as
complete rows of such a matrix rather than single-cell
entries. As a consequence, two words are similar in
meaning not because of their mutual co-occurrence
score (which would correspond to such a single-cell
entry and only for word-by-word matrices) but rather
because they have similar global distributional patterns

Günther et al.

1010
Patient

Hospital

Medicine

Physician

Doctor

Physician

4

5

3

0

0

Doctor

10

10

7

0

0

cos(Physician, Doctor ) = .995
Fig. 1. Simplified word-by-word co-occurrence matrix. As can be seen, the actual
co-occurrences of the words physician and doctor are extremely low (zero); however,
their distributional patterns—their respective rows in the matrix—are very similar.

over all contexts. Thus, synonyms, which tend to very
rarely co-occur directly, will have very similar meanings
in DSMs (Sahlgren, 2008). This property of DSMs also
gives rise to the important notion that words that never
occur together can nevertheless end up with very similar meaning representations (Landauer & Dumais,
1997), as can be seen in Figure 1.

Do DSMs describe word meanings as
co-occurrence patterns?
Other descriptions, while recognizing that DSMs capture global instead of local co-occurrences, still present
them as co-occurrence models (Borghi, Glenberg, &
Kaschak, 2004; Pulvermüller, 2002; Rommers, Dijkstra,
& Bastiaansen, 2013; Van Dam, Rueschemeyer, &
Bekkering, 2010; Van Herten, Chwilla, & Kolk, 2006).
This is typically expressed along the lines that DSMs
give a “semantic similarity measure that computes how
often two words co-occur with the same set of other
words” (Rommers et al., 2013, p. 766), that “LSA values
do not reflect how often a pair of words co-occur, but
rather how often they co-occur with the same words”
(Van Tiel, Van Miltenburg, Zevakhina, & Geurts, 2016,
p. 159), or that they are an “objective measure of cooccurrence in related contexts” (Borghi et al., 2004,
p. 867). In the context of these articles, such descriptions are clearly intended as a short but comprehensible
summary of DSMs. And, indeed, such descriptions
would be completely accurate if the word-by-context
matrix was the final step in the implementation. However, in actual implementations, the raw co-occurrence
vectors are typically subject to further processing.
Weighting schemes are typically applied to the raw
co-occurrence counts, such as positional weighting
depending on the number of intervening words (in
word-by-word models such as Lund & Burgess, 1996),
log-entropy weighting (Martin & Berry, 2007), or pointwise mutual information (PMI; Church & Hanks, 1990).
For example, PMI is defined as
P ( a, b )
.
P ( a ) × P (b )

P(a,b) is estimated via the co-occurrence frequency
and P(a) and P(b) via the global word frequency (or
number of words in a document, if documents serve as
context). On the one hand, the purpose of such weightings is to adjust for word-frequency effects—very frequent words would obviously result in high co-occurrence
values, which then would heavily influence the direction of the word vectors. On the other hand, this also
has the effect that the basis for the word vectors is not
the raw contiguity between a word and a context but
rather the informativity of the relation between them—
their contingency. For example, the raw co-occurrence
frequency between bark and dog is lower than the cooccurrence frequency between dog and the because of
the high frequency of the. The former pair, however,
will have a higher PMI, clearly capturing the significant
degree of informativity between its elements. And this
is in fact highly desirable for a theory of semantic memory, as it is in line with general learning theories emphasizing that contingency, not contiguity, drives the learning
of associations between stimuli (see, e.g., Murdock, 1982;
Rescorla & Wagner, 1972).
These weighted co-occurrence vectors can then be
forwarded to a further processing step: dimensionality
reduction (for earlier applications of dimensionalityreduction techniques in research on semantic representations, see Heider & Olivier, 1972; Osgood, 1952). The
core principle of such techniques is to identify redundancies and mutual constraints in high-dimensional data
patterns to extract underlying factors. Factors that
account only for little variability are then dropped so
that a large part of the variability in the data can be
explained with lower-dimensional representations. As a
very rough example, large parts of the three-dimensional
object “sheet of paper” can be described using a twodimensional representation. Typical dimensionalityreduction techniques for DSMs are singular value
decomposition (Martin & Berry, 2007), latent Dirichlet allocation (Blei, Ng, & Jordan, 2003), and nonnegative
matrix factorization (Arora, Ge, & Moitra, 2012).
Dimensionality reduction has been crucial to the
success of DSMs and is associated with large gains in
performance (Bullinaria & Levy, 2012; Landauer &

Vector-Space Models From a Cognitive Perspective

1011

Dumais, 1997; but see Recchia & Jones, 2009). It is
therefore to be considered a core feature of DSMs, also
from a theoretical point of view (in fact, this is the
reason for the expression latent semantic analysis):
Word meanings are not obtained by just observing
word-context co-occurrences but by abstracting and
generalizing from them and by establishing higherorder representations relying on global information. As
stated by Landauer and Dumais (1997), the “relation
between any two representations depends not only on
direct experience with them, but with everything else
ever experienced” (p. 217). This transition from first- to
higher-order relations is claimed to reflect the transition
from episodic memory, capturing concrete instances of
co-occurrence of entities, to semantic memory, capturing more fundamental, conceptual relations between
them (see Landauer & Dumais, 1997).

1987), or social cognition (Lewicki, 1986), but it has
also been found to play a vital role in language acquisition (Saffran, 2003; Saffran, Aslin, & Newport, 1996).
Starting from this assumption, a model is built that
includes cognitively motivated processing steps (see
the previous paragraph). In contrast to many verbal
theories proposed in cognitive science, DSMs postulate
a computational implementation of the underlying theory, and this implementation includes statisticalprocessing steps. However, the fact that DSMs come
with an implementation based on actual linguistic data
should not be considered a flaw. On the contrary, it is
a major advantage of these models from a theoretical
point of view because it allows researchers to derive
quantitative hypotheses so that the theory’s predictions
can actually be subjected to rigorous empirical tests,
which is in turn crucial for model adjudication.

Are DSMs just language statistics?

Are DSMs psychologically implausible
learning models?

As introduced previously, DSM algorithms are statistical
procedures applied to large collections of text to obtain
quantitative representations of word meaning. Therefore, DSMs are at times described as language statistics,
“a computer program that computes an index of the
relatedness between sets of words on the basis of
occurrences in similar contexts” (Kaschak & Glenberg,
2000, p. 521), or reduced to being methodological tools
(Perfetti, 1998).
However, the seminal work on LSA by Landauer and
Dumais (1997) already puts forward strong arguments
in favor of DSMs as explanatory theories rather than
methodological tools. In fact, DSMs are set up as a
theory explaining how semantic representations are
acquired: These representations can be extracted from
a given distributed input and from contingencies in the
experience of a learner or speaker. DSMs start from the
theoretical assumption that word meanings are inferred
from the contexts in which the words occur (as derived
from the distributional hypothesis). In essence, this is
a specification of the assumption that word meanings
are acquired through experience. As stated by Jenkins
(1954), “intraverbal connections arise in the same manner in which any skill sequence arises, through repetition, contiguity, differential reinforcement” (p. 112).
From a more general perspective, DSMs thus stand
in the tradition of learning theories postulating that
humans are excellent in capturing statistical regularities
in their environments (Anderson & Schooler, 1991) and
extracting information from them (see also Günther,
Smolka, & Marelli, 2019). This ability can be observed
in many different domains, such as visual pattern recognition (Kirkham, Slemmer, & Johnson, 2002), procedural knowledge (Lewicki, Czyzewska, & Hoffman,

When becoming familiar with the traditional countbased algorithms implementing DSMs such as LSA and
HAL, as described above, a very common reaction is to
point out that these models make very questionable
assumptions about the learning processes leading to
semantic representations. These shortcomings of traditional DSMs have already been recognized and acknowledged both by critics of these models (e.g., Sloutsky,
Yim, Yao, & Dennis, 2017) and their proponents (e.g.,
Lemaire & Denhière, 2004). Traditional DSMs are based
on batch-learning algorithms in which a matrix storing
all information is processed simultaneously, using computationally demanding techniques. The results are
static word meanings estimated from a fixed corpus of
experience. And the assumption that humans collect
large amounts of co-occurrence data before at some
point turning these data into semantic representations
is not very convincing (Hoffman, McClelland, & Lambon
Ralph, 2018). In reality, word meanings are not static
but can change dynamically and incrementally with
new experience. (Twenty years ago, people’s semantic
representations for cloud or phone were probably very
different from what they are now.) Therefore, it is usually claimed that models such as LSA are “not a model
of learning” and have “no obvious way of accounting
for developmental changes in word learning” (Sloutsky
et al., 2017, p. 6). However, when only LSA is presented
as a prototypical DSM and as the basis for such an
argument, without considering more recent developments, this gives the incorrect impression that DSMs in
general cannot deal with incrementality.
In principle, a traditional DSM algorithm such as
LSA can cope with incrementality by updating the

1012
co-occurrence matrix with each new input and rerunning
the algorithm. However, this solution is quite unsatisfactory (see Recchia & Jones, 2009). First, the algorithm is
quite computationally demanding, especially because of
the dimensionality reduction step, and hence would put
an enormous strain on cognitive resources during language processing. Second, and even more worrying,
such a mechanism would require a language user to have
the whole raw co-occurrence data, as stored in the initial
matrix, available at any time, basically reducing the
whole point of dimensionality reduction to absurdity.
However, as this criticism has been brought up early
within the DSM community, it has also been addressed
there. Martin and Berry (2007) described an algorithm
for “folding in” new documents into an existing LSA
vector space. However, this still requires a static semantic space to be constructed at some point in time.
Addressing the issue of incrementality more directly,
new DSM algorithms have been proposed that explicitly
implement incremental learning of semantic representations. These models do not start from co-occurrence
matrices but from random vectors, elements of which
are then updated with each newly encountered text
unit ( Jones & Mewhort, 2007; Sahlgren, 2005) and by
using learning algorithms derived from psychological
learning models, for example, the paired-associate
learning mechanism by Murdock (1982) in the BEAGLE
model ( Jones & Mewhort, 2007).
More recently, prediction-based DSMs have been
introduced that estimate word vectors using a neuralnetwork architecture with one hidden layer (Mikolov,
Chen, et al., 2013; Mikolov, Sutskever, et al., 2013). In
this architecture (see Fig. 2 for a graphical description),
words serve as the input layer from which its context
words—the output layer—are predicted (or vice versa).
The activation values of the hidden layer for a given
word in the input layer is then taken as its associated
semantic vector. This network is trained on a corpus,
word by word, and so the incremental development of
distributional vectors over time is an inherent property
of this algorithm. In the psychological literature, it has
been demonstrated that these prediction-based models
are mathematically equivalent to psychologically plausible learning models (Hollis, 2017; Mandera et al.,
2017), such as the Rescorla-Wagner model of reinforcement learning (Rescorla & Wagner, 1972; see also Gluck
& Bower, 1988; Sutton & Barto, 1981).
It has also been shown that the word2vec model
outperforms traditional count-based models in a variety
of tasks, including the prediction of human behavior
(Baroni, Dinu, & Kruszewski, 2014; Mandera et al.,
2017; Pereira, Gershman, Ritter, & Botvinick, 2016). Furthermore, Lazaridou, Marelli, and Baroni (2017) have
shown that such models can learn the meaning of novel

Günther et al.
words from linguistic context in a human-like fashion,
even with very limited exposure to these words. This
nicely highlights the advantages of integrating technical
advancements in model building with insights from
cognitive theory and the mutual benefit to both fields
when they go hand in hand.
Moreover, although such incremental and predictionbased models may seem to be far off from the traditional DSM algorithm described above, Levy and
Goldberg (2014b) showed that they can be described
as performing an implicit matrix factorization of a PMIweighted word-context matrix. This suggests that even
traditional DSM algorithms might not be as implausible
as they appear to be at first glance. This is mirrored in
the claim already put forward by Landauer and Dumais
(1997) that the matrix-factorization algorithm describes
what the system does (the computational level of
description; Mandera et al., 2017) rather than giving an
accurate model of how this is achieved (the algorithmic
level of description, which is incorporated more thoroughly in prediction-based models).

Are DSMs language-engineering tools
rather than psychological models?
DSMs have two major fields of application: Although a
large body of research in cognitive science has been
devoted to applying and investigating these models,
they are even more widely applied in computer science
and computational linguistics. The existence of a vast
body of literature in the fields of machine learning,
natural-language processing, and artificial intelligence
research focused on solving language-related tasks suggests, on an implicit level, the view that DSMs are an
engineering tool rather than a cognitive theory. In this
engineering-oriented view, little emphasis is typically
given to the underlying theory and the cognitive plausibility of DSMs as a model of human semantic representations, as these aspects are not necessarily required
to build well-performing models and algorithms for
these given tasks.
Although DSMs might be valuable for engineering
word meanings, this does not automatically qualify
them as plausible psychological models (Glenberg &
Mehta, 2008; Perfetti, 1998), and “the utility of vectorspace models for understanding human semantic abilities remains in question” (Rogers & Wolmetz, 2016,
pp. 124–125). Sahlgren (2006) explicitly states that it
“cannot be stressed enough that the word-space model
is a computational [emphasis in original] model of
meaning, and not [emphasis in original] a psychologically realistic model of human semantic processing”
(pp. 134–135) and that they represent “not the meanings
that are in our heads, and not the meanings that are out

Vector-Space Models From a Cognitive Perspective

Player

0

Defeats

1

Blue

0

Opponents

0

Output Layer
1

Red

1.4

1

Player

1.2

0

Defeats

1

Blue

0.3

...

0

...

Red

Hidden Layer

...

Input Layer

1013

1

Opponents

Fig. 2. A snapshot of the word2vec model architecture in the training step of processing the target
word defeats in the utterance the red player beats blue opponents (with a window size of 2). The widths
of the edges represent the current weights in the network, which are updated in every training step.
The activation of the hidden layer (1.4, 1.2, . . ., 0.3) is the word vector representing defeats in the
current state of the model and will change as the weights between input layer and hidden layer are
updated. In the skip-gram version of the model (depicted here), the context words are predicted from
the target word. In the cbow version, the target word is predicted from the input instead (i.e., the
input and the output layer are switched).

there in the world, but the meanings that are in the text
[emphasis in original] ” (Sahlgren, 2008, p. 46). Hence,
they might prove highly useful for machine applications
and artificial cognitive systems but not as a psychological model for human semantic representations.
However, these objections can be met with both
theoretical and empirical arguments. The theoretical
arguments concerning how DSMs are conceived but
also implemented as psychological models have already
been outlined in the previous paragraphs. They are
based on a cognitive hypothesis of meaning (Lenci,
2008) and make cognitive assumptions about how these
meanings are acquired (Hollis, 2017; Landauer &
Dumais, 1997; Mandera et al., 2017)—through repeated
experience ( Jenkins, 1954). The nature of a theory
being a “cognitive” one is first of all determined by its
scope rather than its validity.
However, DSMs could still be bad cognitive theories;
whether the hypotheses and assumptions of DSMs as
a cognitive theory of semantic representation are valid,
and therefore whether they are good or useful theories,
is subject to empirical investigation. On the empirical
side, however, a large collection of results show that
DSMs can account for and predict human behavior in
a wide range of semantic memory-related tasks (Baroni,

Dinu, & Kruszewski., 2014; Pereira et al., 2016; see also
Landauer et al., 2007; Lenci, 2008). These include
(among others, see the studies cited herein) categorization tasks (Baroni & Lenci, 2010; Louwerse, 2011), synonym tests (Bullinaria & Levy, 2012; Landauer & Dumais,
1997), similarity judgments (Bruni et al., 2014), freeassociation tasks (Nematzadeh, Meylan, & Griffiths,
2017), semantic priming (Günther, Dudschig, & Kaup,
2016; Jones et al., 2006; Mandera et al., 2017), concept
acquisition (Lazaridou et al., 2017; Ouyang, Boroditsky,
& Frank, 2017), and text comprehension (Landauer,
Foltz, & Laham, 1998). Of course, a high performance
in predicting human behavior qualifies a model as a
good description at the computational level and not
necessarily at the algorithmic level of how this performance is achieved (Mandera et al., 2017). However,
even in this case, DSMs already fulfill the criteria to be
considered as psychological models of the nature of
semantic representations and the structure of semantic
memory, similar to other models of semantic memory
(see Jones et al., 2015).
It is noteworthy that more recent work in the DSM
literature has more thoroughly considered the question
of acquisition. DSMs such as BEAGLE and word2vec
have been shown to incorporate psychologically

1014
plausible learning mechanisms (Murdock, 1982;
Rescorla & Wagner, 1972) to create their word representations, raising their algorithmic plausibility compared with earlier models (Hollis, 2017; Jones et al.,
2015; Mandera et al., 2017; see the previous section). 3
Following from these arguments, DSMs should not
be refuted from the outset as being mere engineering
tools, given that they are formulated as cognitive theories, rely on psychologically plausible assumptions, and
can account for behavioral data. However, we want to
emphasize again that they are qualified as psychological theories by their scope and not necessarily by their
quality. In this section we focused on empirical phenomena that DSMs can account for; however, other
psychological theories of semantic representation have
been postulated to account for phenomena that DSMs
cannot explain (see, e.g., Glenberg & Robertson, 2000).
Thus, we argue that DSMs are serious contenders as
psychological theories of semantic representation, but
their quality as such—as for any other theory—is subject to scientific evaluation.

Aspects of Meaning
In the previous section, we described the algorithms
used to create semantic spaces. In this section, we turn
to common misconceptions related to the implications
of the vector representation format for word meanings.

Are distributional vector dimensions
uninterpretable?
As a consequence of the application of dimensionality
reduction in the model architectures described above,
the dimensions of distributional vectors represent
abstract, or latent, semantic dimensions (Landauer &
Dumais, 1997). Referring to the LSA model, Jones and
Mewhort (2007) summarize this idea well:
In a semantic space model, the features that
represent a word are abstract values that have no
identifiable meaning in isolation from the other
features. Although a particular feature of bird in
a feature list might be “has wings,” the presence
of which has birdlike meaning on its own, the
meaning of bird in a semantic space model is the
aggregate distributed pattern of all the abstract
dimensions, none of which has interpretable
meaning on its own. (p. 2)
Hence, distributional vector dimensions are usually
described as not meaningful or interpretable (e.g.,
Borghesani & Piazza, 2017; Hansson, Bååth, Löhndorf,
Sahlén, & Sikström, 2016), rendering distributional

Günther et al.
vectors “devoid of content” (Rogers & Wolmetz, 2016,
p. 124).
This is an especially troublesome property for many
linguistic theories of semantics, which often rely heavily
on well-defined semantic features (see Bierwisch, 2011;
Johnson, 2008; Nida, 1979), but many psychological
theories of word meanings and concepts are also
founded on interpretable features (e.g., Collins & Loftus,
1975; McRae, Cree, Seidenberg, & McNorgan, 2005;
Smith & Medin, 1981). 4
For many DSMs, such as LSA, HAL, or word2vec,
these claims are completely accurate. However, we also
want to point out noteworthy exceptions and developments. A quite prominent case of DSMs with interpretable dimensions are topic models (Griffiths et al.,
2007). At the very foundation of these models lies the
core theoretical assumption that texts or documents are
generated to cover certain topics. In topic models,
latent Dirichlet allocation (Blei et al., 2003), a dimensionality reduction technique, is applied to a word-bydocument matrix to detect these topics. As a result,
each word vector represents a probability distribution
over semantic topics (models using nonnegative matrix
factorization as a dimensionality reduction technique
are based on the same idea; Dinu & Lapata, 2010; Lee
& Seung, 1999). Griffiths et al. (2007) provide examples
of these topics by presenting the words that have the
highest probability scores on different topics. For example, the highest-value words on one topic were play,
stage, audience, theater, and actors; on another topic
they were hypothesis, experiment, scientific, observations, and scientists; and on yet another topic they were
class, Marx, economic, capitalist, and socialist. These
topics can be labeled (similar to labeling latent factors
after a factorial analysis), for example, in this case using
labels such as drama, science, and Marxism, making
each dimension of the semantic space interpretable (but
for criticism concerning the objectivity of such post hoc
topic labels, see Chang, Gerrish, Wang, Boyd-Graber,
& Blei, 2009). In a similar fashion, other studies derived
interpretable dimensions from traditional LSA spaces
by applying mathematical procedures such as varimax
rotation (Evangelopoulos, Zhang, & Prybutok, 2012) or
base transformations (Olmos, Jorge-Botana, León, &
Escudero, 2014) to these spaces.
Other studies have shown that interpretable information can be extracted from initially uninterpretable distributional vectors. Hollis and Westbury (2016) applied
a principal component analysis to a semantic space
obtained through word2vec and found that the principal
components obtained can be identified with basic-level
semantic dimensions such as concreteness, or the affective dimensions of valence, arousal, and dominance
already postulated by Osgood, Suci, and Tannenbaum

Vector-Space Models From a Cognitive Perspective

1015

Fig. 3. A two-dimensional projection of the 50 nearest neighbors of mouse in an actual semantic space. Semantic similarity is represented
by the distance between the words as well as the color of lines connecting them. As can be seen, the neighborhood is clustered into different meanings and senses (computer mouse, mouse as an animal, mouse as a laboratory animal), with high within-cluster similarities but
low between-cluster similarities.

(1957). In general, understanding what kind of semantic
information is captured by distributional vectors is a
topic of intense debate and current research. For
instance, Tsvetkov, Faruqui, Ling, Lample, and Dyer
(2015) show that semantic type information (e.g.,
ANIMAL or MOTION5) can be, at least partially, recovered from distributional vector dimensions. Further,
Durda, Buchanan, and Caron (2009) demonstrate that
feature norms produced by human speakers can be
predicted from distributional vectors using a neuralnetwork mapping approach. And in a recent study, Sommerauer and Fokkens (2018) showed that distributional
vectors capture semantic properties related to the functionality of the denoted concepts by using a supervised
classification algorithm that estimates from the vector

dimension values whether a given word has a given
semantic property, such as “is dangerous.” These studies
show that distributional vectors in principle encode
semantically interpretable information, which can be
extracted by using adequate methods.

Does each distributional vector represent
a single, fixed symbolic meaning?
In a semantic space, each unique word form is associated with exactly one high-dimensional numerical vector representing its meaning. In reality, however, a very
large proportion of words have multiple meanings. For
example, some words are homonyms: A mouse can be
an animal or a piece of computer hardware. Beyond

1016
this, the issue of polysemy, in which words have multiple related senses, is even more widespread: Paper
can be a physical piece of paper but also a text printed
on this paper, and even a piece of text without being
printed on paper. And the fact that meanings are
context-sensitive is virtually ubiquitous: For the exact
same object described by the word newspaper, the
aspect of carrying printed text is relevant in the sentence I read the newspaper, even if it is an online newspaper. On the other hand, in the sentence I use the
newspaper to protect my face from the rain, the aspect
of being a solid physical object is relevant (Glenberg
& Robertson, 2000).
Because DSMs represent word meanings as a single
numerical vector with fixed values, Glenberg and
Robertson (2000) argue that they cannot appropriately
capture this context sensitivity. French and Labiouse
(2002) similarly argue that distributional vector representations are not context-sensitive because they are
only an average representation of the word’s distribution. Accordingly, they conclude that DSMs cannot
accurately represent metaphorical meanings, such as
wolf in the sentence John is a real wolf with the ladies—
which does not imply that he turns into an actual canine
in female company. Thus, it has been concluded that
multiple meanings, senses, or interpretations cannot be
represented via one single vector.
However, this argument neglects the fact that distributional vectors are distributed representations that
encode a word’s learning history rather than being a
symbolic meaning representation (see Westbury, 2016).
Thus, a word with multiple meanings or senses would
be encoded in the vector and its position in the semantic space; in this respect, the observation by French and
Labiouse (2002) that vectors are average representations
is correct. However, this does not imply the conclusion
that multiple meanings or senses can no longer be
retrieved from these vectors. Figure 3, created using the
package LSAfun (Günther et al., 2015) for the R software environment (Version 3.6.1; R Core Team, 2019),
provides an intuitive basis for this argument using the
mouse example (Camacho-Collados & Pilehvar, 2018)
and demonstrates that semantic spaces are structured
in a way that allows one to retrieve different meanings
and senses from a single word vector by considering
its position and the relative positions of other words in
the semantic space (for more detailed approaches, see
Camacho-Collados & Pilehvar, 2018; Heylen, Wielfaert,
Speelman, & Geeraerts, 2015). In a different example,
Griffiths et al. (2007) show that different semantic
dimensions of their distributional vectors capture different contexts in which words are used—and by extension different meanings and senses (for a similar
demonstration, see Lee & Seung, 1999). Hence, DSMs

Günther et al.
seem to well account for different subordinate meanings as a function of contextual information.
Various computational methods have also been
shown to consistently outperform statistical baselines
in disambiguating different word senses and meanings
from distributional vectors (see Camacho-Collados &
Pilehvar, 2018), for example, by relying on their respective similarities to multiple different predetermined
word categories, or clusters (Boleda, Padó, & Utt, 2012;
Pantel & Lin, 2002). Although the introduction of such
predetermined categories is potentially problematic
from a psychological perspective, as actual speakers
have to learn these categories from experience in a
bottom-up and dynamic way rather than obtaining them
top-down from an outside source, such studies still
demonstrate that distributional vectors encode information that can be harvested to disambiguate different
senses.
Pursuing a different line of argumentation, Westbury
(2016) reasons that, even for words traditionally considered monosemous, the assumption of single symbolic word meanings can be called into question. It is
not unusual that two entities that share only very few
features—or sometimes even no features at all—are
assigned the same label: Two patients diagnosed with
depression can have a disjunctive set of symptoms, or
several experiences one describes as happy can have
nothing in common. Westbury (2016) thus argues that
word meanings should be seen as mappings from particular experiences and instances onto a common label
rather than well-defined feature definitions—which fits
perfectly with distributional vector representations of
word meaning.
In discussing context sensitivity and its relation to
word meanings and senses in sentences, Jones and
Mewhort (2007) point out that multiple meanings of a
word can be stored within a single vector representation—
as shown above—and that different meanings can
emerge from a single representation depending on the
word’s context (as postulated in different psychological
theories of discourse comprehension; Kintsch, 1988;
Tabossi, 1988). As a direct demonstration, Kintsch (2001)
proposed a model based on his construction-integration
theory (Kintsch, 1988) that computes a vector representation for predicate–argument constructions, such as
SHARK(LAWYER), representing the proposition My lawyer is a shark. This model updates the predicate vector
by adding vectors that are close to both the predicate
and the argument to it and is therefore argued to capture
the meaning aspects of shark that are relevant in this
context (being vicious rather than being a fish). Kintsch
(2000) also argues that this model can account for metaphor comprehension, and Jorge-Botana, León, Olmos,
and Hassan-Montero (2010) use this model to extract

Vector-Space Models From a Cognitive Perspective
different senses from polysemous words. In a similar
spirit, Baroni and colleagues showed that different
senses of adjectives are activated depending on the
noun they are used with (using compositional methods
described in more detail later in the article; Baroni,
Bernardi, & Zamparelli, 2014; Baroni & Zamparelli,
2010): An old tomato is a rotten tomato, old ruins are
ancient ruins, and an old belief is a traditional belief.
At this point, one could argue that the contextsensitive modification of one vector is an extension to
original DSM representations. However, it should be
noted that only standard distributional vectors are used
in these approaches, and they can therefore work only
because these vectors already encode all necessary
information. In fact, the possibility of integrating LSA
with context models such as the construction-integration
model was already pointed out and discussed in
Landauer and Dumais (1997).

Do DSMs represent only isolated word
meanings without relational structure?
In DSMs as outlined so far, word vectors are constructed
on the basis of surface-level word co-occurrences without considering the relations or syntactic dependencies
between the words (as discussed by Hansson et al.,
2016). Although moving-window models such as HAL
or word2vec encode some syntax, this takes place on
a very rudimentary level. However, languages typically
use syntactic dependencies to express the relations
between words, which are often the focus of logic and
ontological theories of meaning, which in turn are central to linguistic analyses of semantics (see Annesi,
Croce, & Basili, 2013). In addition, DSMs also seem to
largely ignore relations between words in their meaning
representations: Because DSMs represent word meanings as vectors in a semantic space, research has
focused on simple similarity metrics such as cosine
similarity. Thus, DSMs appear to represent word meanings as isolated elements, without actually considering
the relations between them, neither in encoding nor in
representation. Thus, they appear to miss out on essential aspects of semantics.
However, both issues of encoding and representation
have been addressed within the DSM framework. Using
the BEAGLE model, which is explicitly designed to
encode word-order information during learning, Jones
and Mewhort (2007) demonstrate that the nearest “left”
neighbors for words (Luther, barbaric, and burger for
king) differ from their nearest “right” neighbors (Midas,
Lear, and Henry for king). Thus, order information can
be retrieved from distributional vectors.
Another line of research has directly focused on
building DSMs that explicitly consider syntactic

1017
dependencies in the input data and thus already in
model building (e.g., Biemann & Riedl, 2013; Lin, 1998;
Padó & Lapata, 2007). These models rely on dependencyparsed corpora and in essence consider words as cooccurring in the same context if there is a specific
syntactic relation between them. For example, in the
phrase man bites dog, dog occurs one time as the object
of bite, but in dog bites man, man occurs one time as
the object of bite. Padó and Lapata (2007) demonstrated
that DSMs built from syntactic dependencies can predict
behavioral data such as semantic priming, detect synonyms, and disambiguate different word senses (showing again that distributional vectors do not represent a
fixed symbolic meaning). Another DSM explicitly
designed to capture properties of and relations between
concepts, such as that a tiger is in a jungle or has
stripes, was proposed by Baroni, Murphy, Barbu, and
Poesio (2010). This model infers these properties by
using a part-of-speech tagged corpus and considering
explicitly the type of linguistic construction in which
pairs of words co-occur.
However, in this context, Landauer (2007) argues
that the importance of syntactic dependencies and
grammatical relations for mental representations of
word meanings is only marginal compared with the
co-occurrence of words and instead argues in favor of
bag-of-word models6 of meaning such as LSA. Indeed,
recent research provides a proof of principle that standard DSM vectors can also encode structured information that can be uncovered by using more refined,
asymmetrical similarity measures instead of the typical
symmetrical cosine information (Kintsch, 2014; Lenci &
Benotto, 2012). Kintsch (2014) developed an asymmetrical similarity measure for which, for example, the
similarity between China and Korea is rather low,
whereas the similarity between Korea and China is very
high, reflecting behavioral patterns typically observed
in human free associations. In other studies more oriented toward linguistic relations between words, it has
been shown that relations such as hypernymy and
hyponymy (i.e., set–subset relations: Every dog is a
mammal, but the opposite is not true) can be inferred
from distributional vectors by using asymmetrical similarity measures (Lenci & Benotto, 2012).
However, semantic relations between words clearly
go beyond the quite coarse relations outlined here: For
example, the pairs skin and body as well as bark and
tree both share a relationship involving one covering
the other. This issue of automatically identifying an
open-ended class of semantic relations has been
addressed in studies on analogies. In a famous example,
Mikolov, Yih, and Zweig (2013) found that the nearest
vector to [king − man + woman] is [queen], suggesting
that king and man share the same relation as queen

1018
and woman. Apart from this illustrative example, the
possibility of recovering open-ended relational similarities between words from their distributional vectors was
systematically confirmed in several studies (Levy &
Goldberg, 2014a; Mikolov, Yih, & Zweig, 2013; Turney,
2006; Zhila, Yih, Meek, Zweig, & Mikolov, 2013).

Do DSMs capture only linguistic
knowledge about word meanings?
As described earlier, the data from which DSMs are built
typically consists of large amounts of natural text. The
general objective of such algorithms has been described
by Buitelaar, Cimiano, and Magnini (2005) as “the
acquisition of explicit knowledge implicitly contained
in (textual) data” (p. 4). However, in both linguistics
and cognitive science, researchers often differentiate
between linguistic knowledge on the one hand (what
would be considered the semantics of a word) and
nonlinguistic knowledge on the other, derived from
people’s knowledge about the world ( Jackendoff, 2003;
Lang & Maienborn, 2011; although this differentiation
is also debated, see Hagoort, Hald, Bastiaansen, &
Petersson, 2004). For example, the fact that the U.S.
president is married is part of people’s world knowledge, whereas the fact that a husband is married is part
of the semantics of the word. Likewise, the fact that
being a woman typically is a necessary condition for
being a mother is part of people’s semantic knowledge,
whereas the information that being woman raises the
likelihood of being underprivileged in many human
societies is part of people’s world knowledge. Because
DSMs are traditionally built from language data, it could
be assumed that they capture only linguistic knowledge. Following this distinction, DSMs have been used
in empirical studies to exclusively account for linguistic,
semantic knowledge in research on linguistic versus
extralinguistic knowledge (Dudschig, Maienborn, &
Kaup, 2016).
However, such a conclusion would underestimate
the knowledge about word meanings that is implicitly
encoded in natural text, as speakers often use language
to communicate their view on the world and to express
their concepts, assumptions, norms, and ideas. Accordingly, Caliskan, Bryson, and Narayanan (2017) have
shown that DSMs can in fact draw implicit information
related to social and cultural biases from text data: They
used DSM vectors to compute word similarities of items
used in the Implicit Association Test (Greenwald,
McGhee, & Schwartz, 1998) to approximate reaction
times (with higher cosines corresponding to faster reactions). These measures showed the same biases as
humans in several domains, such as gender biases with
respect to career choices and societal roles (see also

Günther et al.
Lenton et al., 2009, for an earlier DSM-based approach
to this issue), attitudes toward race, or biases toward
physical- versus mental-health issues. These results
were further corroborated by Bhatia (2017b).
In another recent study on world knowledge-based
judgments, Bhatia (2017a) used DSM similarities to measure associations between mental representations. With
this approach, Bhatia demonstrated that DSMs can predict human performance (and biases) across a wide
range of high-level judgment tasks, including the conjunction fallacy (Tversky & Kahneman, 1983), base-rate
neglect (Kahneman & Tversky, 1973), and the recognition heuristic (Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996).
Such studies show that the information captured by
DSMs goes beyond purely linguistic semantic knowledge and into the domain of (implicit) world knowledge and cultural specificities.

Can DSMs account for the productivity
of meaning?
Another feature of word meanings in natural-language
settings is that they can be very productive (depending
on the specific language). For example, meanings such
as objectify can be created from object via affixation,
and words such as air and port can be combined into
compounds (airport). Most importantly, however, word
meanings can be created and words that have never
been used or experienced before can be readily understood by a language user. This is particularly true for
the abovementioned cases of complex expressions: It
is quite easy to understand what it means to twitterify
politics, or what a news-addiction is supposed to be.
And language users have no problem in using existing
words in novel ways, as in the newspaper example in
the previous sections.
However, the DSM algorithm runs on a given corpus
of text. If a word is not included in such a corpus, no
vector representation will be derived. And if a word is
never used in a specific sense (i.e., if it is not used in
specific contexts), this will in turn affect the vector
representation itself. In both cases, the incremental
addition of new experience as described earlier will
not help because the argument is that humans can deal
with meanings that they have never experienced or
used before. Glenberg and Robertson (2000) therefore
notice that DSMs cannot deal with novel uses of known
meanings, but that a “computational model should be
able to account for material beyond its training set. It
is especially important that a theory of language and
meaning be flexible and productive beyond its training
set because humans are flexible and productive”
(p. 397). The problem of the nonproductivity of the
traditional DSM algorithm has also been recognized

Vector-Space Models From a Cognitive Perspective
elsewhere (Lynott & Ramscar, 2001; J. Mitchell & Lapata,
2010).
However, the issue of novel uses of existing words
can be addressed within the DSM framework. As discussed previously, several studies have shown that distributional vectors can encode various aspects of word
meaning, including semantic features (Durda et al.,
2009) and functionality-related semantic properties
(Sommerauer & Fokkens, 2018). This does not require
that all of this information is explicitly mentioned in
the text; it can be inferred from the distributional similarity to other words denoting concepts that share the
same properties and features. As an example, if you
learn that you can build boxes out of something called
polystyrene to transport pasta and curries, you can easily infer that you could also build something like an
umbrella out of this material. This works even if the
possibility were never explicitly mentioned because the
distributional use of polystyrene is similar to that of
other waterproof material such as plastic or polyethylene. Depending on the context in which a word is used,
this relevant dimension can then be emphasized
through context-sensitive updating (see Kintsch, 1988,
2001, as discussed previously).
This still leaves the issue of the meaning of novel
words. How can DSMs represent meanings for words
that are not part of a corpus? The answer can be found
in the recent emergence of compositional DSMs addressing this issue (Baroni, Bernardi, & Zamparelli, 2014),
including the domains of affixed words (Günther et al.,
2019; Marelli & Baroni, 2015) and compounds (Günther
& Marelli, 2016, 2018; Marelli, Gagné, & Spalding, 2017).
These models use training procedures to detect the
structure guiding the compositional process forming
complex word meanings; it can then apply this structure to form new meanings. For example, the affixation
model by Marelli and Baroni (2015) uses a regression
approach mapping mummy to mummify, person to personify, and so on, to estimate a function representing
the -ify affix. Essentially, this function encodes how the
-ify affix usually affects a word meaning. It can then be
applied to new stems, for example, to twitter, to create
a vector representation for twitterify. Similar training
approaches have been used to create vector representations for the meaning of novel compounds, such as
honey soup or star rock, from their constituent words
(Günther & Marelli, 2016, 2018; Marelli et al., 2017).
To some extent, such approaches are still limited by
the words contained in the training set: Clearly identifiable morphological constituents of words have to be
repeatedly observed in a corpus so that these models
can be trained and applied. However, recent advancements in the domain of natural-language processing
have addressed this issue by implementing models such

1019
as fastText (Bojanowski, Grave, Joulin, & Mikolov, 2017)
that are trained on sublexical units, such as letter
n-grams (e.g., the 3-grams mou, ous, and use), and not
only lexical units such as words (mouse). To represent
word meanings, the obtained sublexical representations
are then used to construct distributional vectors for any
combination of these units. In a very recent study,
Hendrix (2019) showed that semantic measures derived
from these vectors can indeed be used to predict participants’ response times toward nonwords in a lexical
decision task.
Thus, even meanings for novel words—new morphologically complex forms as well as completely novel
letter combinations—can be represented within a DSM
framework, with adequate computational and compositional models at hand. Again, the argument that these
are extensions beyond how DSMs are originally conceptualized can be countered: For these systems to
work efficiently all of the information must be already
available in the statistical regularities in the input captured by DSMs and is thus capable of being decoded
from the original distributional vectors.

Embodiment and the Role
of Nonlinguistic Experience
In the previous section, we focused on issues concerning the vector format of meaning representation and
what type of information these vectors can encode. In
the following section, we turn to the data that are used
to create these vectors. This will also lead us to the
theoretical debate on embodiment, which has often
been framed in opposition to distributional models.

Do DSMs imply that language
constitutes the conceptual system?
As described earlier, DSMs are usually trained on large
corpora of natural text. Thus, they build their semantic
representations solely on the basis of linguistic experience. However, this is surely not representative of
humans, who in fact have access to substantial amounts
of nonlinguistic, sensorimotor experience, from perceptual input to actions in the surrounding world. It is
therefore more than plausible that humans heavily rely
on this experience as well when building semantic representations. This assumption is at the core of the
embodiment view of language comprehension (Barsalou,
1999; Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002; Glenberg & Robertson,
2000; Sadoski, 2018; Zwaan & Madden, 2005). Indeed,
it has been argued that semantic representations can
be reasonably understood only as emerging from and
being based on bodily and perceptual experience
(Glenberg, 2015).

1020
In this context, DSMs have often been discussed as
an opposing theoretical approach, as they rely on
purely linguistic input and do not consider sensorimotor experience (Borghesani & Piazza, 2017; Glenberg,
Gutierrez, Levin, Japuntich, & Kaschak, 2004; Glenberg
& Kaschak, 2002; Glenberg & Robertson, 2000; MunozRubke, Kafadar, & James, 2018; Sadoski, 2018; Simmons,
Hamann, Harenski, Hu, & Barsalou, 2008; for an extensive overview on this debate from both theoretical
points of view, see De Vega, Glenberg, & Graesser,
2012). Rogers et al. (2004) acknowledge that verbal
experience is an important contributor to conceptual
knowledge, but because DSMs rely completely on verbal input and are models without any influence of
nonverbal experience, they cannot accurately represent
humans’ conceptual system (see also Borghesani &
Piazza, 2017). It has also been noted that this very
property of distributional models renders them ideal
candidates to account for meaning representations of
abstract concepts that cannot easily be related to sensorimotor experience, such as equality or justice (Borghi
et al., 2017).
We believe that it is critical in this discussion to distinguish between theoretical assumptions on the one
hand and practical implementations on the other.
Although DSMs typically are built entirely from text
data, this is in fact only a practical convenience, likely
resulting from the wide availability of text data that can
be very easily and naturally segmented into basic, discrete units (e.g., words and documents). The theoretical
claim of the distributional hypothesis, namely that the
contexts in which a word occurs determine its meaning,
does not need to be restricted to linguistic contexts
alone (although this may have been the case for the
original proposal by Harris, 1954). The possibility of
including other sources of experience was already discussed in the original article on LSA (Landauer &
Dumais, 1997):
Indeed, if one judiciously added numerous
pictures of scenes with and without rabbits to the
context columns in the encyclopedia corpus
matrix, and filled in a handful of appropriate cells
in the rabbit and hare word rows, LSA could easily
learn that the words rabbit and hare go with
pictures containing rabbits and not to ones
without, and so forth. (p. 227)
Lund and Burgess (1996) made similar claims about
HAL:
We do think a HAL-like model that was sensitive
to the same co-occurrences in the natural
environment as a human language learner (not just

Günther et al.
the language stream) would be able to capitalize
on this additional information and construct more
meaningful representations. (p. 29)
Note that such arguments have to assume that the
perceptual environment is categorized into discrete
units so that co-occurrences can be counted. Although
it is a fundamental psychological insight that humans
organize their perceptual input into categories, implementing this into a computational model is certainly
not a trivial task. For the sake of this argument, we have
to assume that the input to such models is already in
a discrete format; see the next section for an overview
on how current multimodal DSMs actually integrate
perceptual and language information in a single model.
We argue that, considering this distinction between
theoretical assumptions and practical implementation,
it is striking to see that DSMs and (some) models of
embodied cognition actually have very much in common. For example, a highly influential and very productive model in the embodied tradition is the experiential
trace model by Zwaan and Madden (2005). This model
assumes that all mental representations are formed from
experiential traces that can be divided into sensorimotor and linguistic traces. Critically, these traces are interconnected, and these interconnections are assumed to
arise from co-occurrences: co-occurrences between
sensorimotor traces (e.g., seeing a dog on a leash),
between sensorimotor and linguistic traces (seeing a
dog while hearing the word dog), and between linguistic traces (hearing the words dog and leash in the same
linguistic context). Zwaan and Madden (2005) explicitly
mention that DSMs such as LSA can be used to model
the last kind (i.e., linguistic co-occurrences). However,
when dropping the implicit assumption that DSMs are
inherently language-centric—which is not an actual
theoretical assumption of these models—and accepting
that they can also take sensorimotor experience as context (for a similar argument from a neurobiological
point of view, see also Hasson, Egidi, Marelli, & Willems,
2018), then the experiential trace model can in fact be
itself identified as a DSM.

Are DSMs based on nonlinguistic
experience actually implemented?
The view that the exclusion of sensorimotor experience
might be a practical rather than a theoretical issue has
been acknowledged by some critics of DSMs (see
Glenberg et al., 2004; Glenberg & Robertson, 2000).
However, one of their points of criticism against solutions such as those proposed by Landauer and Dumais
(1997) or Lund and Burgess (1996) is that these are not
actually implemented in the models. In fact, similar

Vector-Space Models From a Cognitive Perspective
arguments can be found within the DSM literature itself,
as stated by Sahlgren (2006):
In order for the word-space model to qualify as a
model of human semantic processing, it needs to
reach beyond the linguistic frontier into the realms
of the extralinguistic world, and to include
extralinguistic context in its representation. I do
not believe that this is impossible in principle,
although I do believe that it would require a
radical innovation in how we define and use
context for accumulating context vectors. Until
that breakthrough, we should be wary about
claims for cognitive plausibility. (p. 135)
Therefore, the claim that “the central deficiency of AIbased theories is the lack of a convincing account of
comprehension and meaning” (Sadoski, 2018, p. 337)
is perpetuated in the literature: In a very recent review
article, Sadoski (2018) concludes that “disembodied
computer vectors of word relationships could not comprehend situations that would be quite simple even for
young children” (p. 337), explicitly referring to the arguments and study by Glenberg and Robertson (2000).
Yet, following up on the initial objections, there has
been a surge in recent years in research on multimodal
DSMs (e.g., Andrews, Vigliocco, & Vinson, 2009; Bruni
et al., 2014; Kiela, Bulat, & Clark, 2015; Kiela & Clark,
2015; Lazaridou, Bruni, & Baroni, 2014; Lazaridou,
Pham, & Baroni, 2015; Lopopolo & Miltenburg, 2015;
Sadeghi, McClelland, & Hoffman, 2015; see also Lee &
Seung, 1999). However, also in very recent presentations of DSMs as purely language-centric models, these
newer developments are often not considered (Sadoski,
2018; Munoz-Rubke et al., 2018).
Multimodal DSMs are explicitly designed to incorporate nonlinguistic (experiential and perceptual) and
linguistic data to create distributional vectors. From a
theoretical point of view, they are therefore in line with
models of embodied cognition such as the experiential
trace model cited above (Zwaan & Madden, 2005). For
instance, Howell, Jankowicz, and Becker (2005) showed,
using a neural-network training technique, that vectors
trained on text corpora and ratings on sensorimotor
features collected from participants performed better
than vectors trained on text corpora alone. Likewise,
Andrews et al. (2009) use a Bayesian approach to integrate traditional distributional vectors with speakergenerated feature norms into combined semantic
representations (for a similar approach, see Steyvers,
2010). Using machine-learning algorithms, Bruni et al.
(2014) extract vectors representing visual features
directly from images and then merge these with traditional distributional vectors for the associated image

1021
labels to construct more comprehensive semantic representations. The model by Lazaridou et al. (2014)
learns a mapping function between visual and textual
vectors from training examples that can then be applied
to instances outside the training set. Lazaridou et al.
(2015) use an algorithm similar to the word2vec model
(Mikolov, Chen, et al., 2013; Mikolov, Sutskever, et al.,
2013) to predict linguistic contexts simultaneously with
visual features from words to construct distributional
vectors (the words were used as labels for the images,
and visual vectors representing the visual features were
extracted automatically from these images). In a similar
vein, Sadeghi et al. (2015) applied an LSA-like algorithm
on a corpus of labeled objects (corresponding to the
words in the LSA) in visual scenes (corresponding to
the documents in the LSA) to derive distributional vectors for the object labels.
Perhaps more surprisingly, in other perceptual
domains models have been designed that incorporate
sound data (Kiela & Clark, 2015; Lopopolo & Miltenburg,
2015) or even olfactory data (Kiela et al., 2015) into
distributional vectors, following the principle methods
used in the visual domain as outlined above. These
multimodal models have been shown to outperform
traditional DSMs based only on text data in a variety of
tasks, for example, in predicting human similarity ratings
(Bruni et al., 2014). They can also overcome problems
associated with text-based DSMs, which, for example,
tend to undervalue basic perceptual information.
That said, it is apparent that these models rely largely
on visual data extracted from images, mainly because
of the availability of large annotated image databases
and methods for extracting vectors from image data
(see, however, Kiela et al., 2015; Kiela & Clark, 2015;
Lopopolo & Miltenburg, 2015). The scope of the
embodiment view obviously goes far beyond this. However, it is important to highlight again that the main
issue is collecting adequate training data, and it is thus
not directly related to the model architectures or learning algorithms incorporated in DSMs. In other words,
the issue is practical rather than theoretical, as discussed in the previous section. In this context, the
already existing and fully implemented models
described here show that nonlinguistic data can be
incorporated to build distributional vectors, improving
their quality. This is an important first step in the direction of more realistic DSMs using all kinds of sensorimotor and linguistic experience available to humans.

Do language-based DSMs have access
to sensorimotor information?
Although multimodal DSMs have become available
recently, the vast majority of research using DSMs has

Günther et al.

1022
used traditional models trained on language corpora.
In many cases, these have been used to model conceptual knowledge. But how can this be plausible, given
that these DSMs have access only to language data,
whereas people’s conceptual knowledge relies heavily
on sensorimotor information?
Because of this supposed limitation, it has been
argued that text-based DSMs can serve only as models
of lexical semantics (and are therefore restricted to the
linguistic or engineering domain) but not as models of
the human conceptual system (Barsalou, 1999; French
& Labiouse, 2002; Glenberg et al., 2004; Glenberg &
Robertson, 2000; Sadoski, 2018). This argument relies
on the assumption that the language people use is
independent from the world they live in and from their
sensorimotor experience. In reality, however, one of
the primary functions of language is to confer to others
information about the world people perceive and act
in. Therefore, a substantial amount of sensorimotor
information is actually incorporated in language—for
example, the fact that some food is tasty, whereas other
things that can be eaten are far from being tasty.
The idea that sensorimotor information and language
are intertwined has been put forward by Louwerse in
the symbol-interdependency hypothesis (e.g., Louwerse,
2011; Louwerse & Zwaan, 2009). This hypothesis
receives support from the observation that distributional vectors actually encode surprising amounts of
information about the surrounding world: For example,
Louwerse and Zwaan (2009) applied a multidimensional scaling technique to the similarities between
distributional vectors for city names and projected them
onto a two-dimensional space. They found that the
coordinates of the cities within this space were correlated with the actual geographical positions of these
cities, in the real world (Louwerse & Zwaan, 2009;
Recchia & Louwerse, 2016) as well as in fictional worlds
such as Middle-earth from The Lord of the Rings
(Louwerse & Benesh, 2012). Other studies have shown
that the similarity structure between distributional vectors also reflects other real-world similarity structures,
such as the relative position of the days of the week or
months of the year (Louwerse, Raisig, Tillman, &
Hutchinson, 2015). Importantly for the argument presented here, studies testing the symbol-interdependency
hypothesis have also found that distributional vectors
encode the vertical location of objects in the world
(Hutchinson & Louwerse, 2013), perceptual modalities
(visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory, and haptic;
Louwerse & Connell, 2011), affective dimensions (dominance, valence, and arousal; Hollis & Westbury, 2016),
the typical spatial organization of objects, or the sensibility of performing certain actions with specific
objects (Louwerse, 2011). Thus, distributional vectors

do encode not only what would generally be considered world knowledge but also certain sensorimotor
aspects of human conceptual systems that are usually
explained by referring to embodied or grounded
approaches of meaning.
In summary, because language is not independent
from the world in which it is used but rather to communicate about said world, and therefore the structure
of semantic relations within language tends to reflect
the structure of the outside world (see also Andrews
et al., 2009; Hoffman et al., 2018; Johns & Jones, 2012;
Riordan & Jones, 2011). Because distributional vectors
are heavily influenced by statistical regularities of language, they also incorporate substantial amounts of
sensorimotor experience. Note, however, that although
there is a correspondence between information
expressed in language and the physical world, neither
we (nor the authors cited above) claim this correspondence to be perfect. Thus, although some aspects of
meaning can be obtained from both sources, others are
available only from either of them (Bruni et al., 2014).

Open Issues
In the previous sections, we discussed a wide range of
arguments that are frequently directed at DSMs. We also
outlined how these arguments have already been or
can successfully be addressed within the DSM framework and thus are not in-principle arguments against
the validity of DSMs as models of human semantic
representations. However, open issues still need to be
addressed. In the following sections, we outline some
of these issues as potentially paramount topics for
future research on the cognitive validity of DSMs.

Models and Training Data
We have pointed out throughout this article that a series
of initial criticisms against DSMs may be related to the
data on which the models are trained rather than to the
models themselves. It is important to point out again
that the distinction between the model architecture on
the one hand and the training data on the other is a
critical one and that highly valid arguments against one
aspect cannot readily be taken as valid arguments
against the other.
In most instances, we have argued that objections
raised against DSMs are in fact arguments against the
training data: This concerns not only the issue of multimodality but also issues related to the cognitive plausibility of the models and access to perceptual information
through language. Although research on DSMs constantly
strives to improve the quality and adequacy of the training data, this issue is far from being solved. Obtaining

Vector-Space Models From a Cognitive Perspective
optimal training data is therefore an open issue to be
addressed in future research.
In this context, we argue that several points should
be considered. A common approach in machine learning and natural-language processing to obtain higherquality training data is increasing the amount of data
itself, which usually improves the quality of the empirical results (Recchia & Jones, 2009). Having more training data makes the model algorithms more robust
against statistical noise and increases the representativeness of the training data for a population of speakers, as usually investigated in empirical studies. The
improvement of model performance with corpus size
has also been suggested to determine better inferences
about perceptual representations: These inferences are
based on redundancies between the perceptual world
and language (see Louwerse, 2011) that can be more
easily detected with more language experience available to the model ( Johns & Jones, 2012).
However, increasing the amount of training data cannot be the entire answer to the question. For one, not
only the size but also the structure of the training data
(i.e., the type of data included) is a critical factor for
its adequacy. For example, Herdağdelen and Marelli
(2017) demonstrated that word frequencies derived
from social-media corpora—which can be assumed to
be close to actual human language experience—give
better results for psycholinguistic studies than other
general-purpose corpora. Thus, optimal training data
for DSMs should be as representative of human experience as possible, which would also be desirable for
increasing the cognitive plausibility of these models.
Another issue to be considered in this context is the
fact that DSMs are usually set up to model semantic
representations on the population level rather than the
individual level. However, this approach is inherently
inadequate to account for individual differences
between speakers in a DSM framework (for results indicating that typical DSMs are adequate only for highly
literate persons, see Schmidtke, Van Dyke, & Kuperman,
2018). In an “ideal” world (from a research perspective),
it would be highly valuable to build semantic spaces
for individual speakers on the basis of their idiosyncratic experience (for an impressive study collecting 3
years of video material of a researcher’s child to study
its language acquisition, see Roy et al., 2006). In this
context, Johns, Jones, and Mewhort (2016) proposed a
method to sample documents from a large multiplesource corpus to estimate the subcorpus best representing the language experience of a speaker group or
individual speakers, in that it best captures standard
behavioral effects such as the word-frequency effect
(Brysbaert, Mandera, & Keuleers, 2018) in these participants’ performance. Although relying on such behavioral

1023
“training data” might not always be practicable or
feasible, their results suggest some rule-of-thumb
approaches to the selection of adequate subcorpora:
For example, the estimated subcorpus representing
the experience of younger participants contained far
more young-adult books than that of older participants. In principle, the technical instruments for actual
large-scale individual data collection are readily available in the age of the Internet and social media for
data experienced as well as produced by speakers;
the question is more if and how such a line of research
should be pursued given the severe ethical issues it
raises.
Finally, an area in which the technical solution is less
advanced is the collection of data that include actual
multimodal experience. At the moment, multimodal
DSMs largely rely on annotated data sets of sensorimotor information (such as images or sound files), which
are then integrated with information collected from
linguistic corpora. However, either are usually obtained
from independent sources of data: The training corpora
typically do not consist of text used in the context of
the images (or other sensorimotor information). This is
a crucial shortcoming for some embodied theories of
meaning, in which the notion of co-occurrence between
linguistic and sensorimotor traces of experience is central (Zwaan & Madden, 2005). Thus, an ideal database
for truly multimodal DSMs would consist of a large
collection of actual experience in which co-occurring
entities from different modalities and sources (sensorimotor and linguistic) are simultaneously encoded. We
acknowledge that this is not a trivial task. A possible
starting point that seems to be technologically feasible
in the near future might be the decoding of video material using techniques developed in artificial intelligence
research, such as visual object recognition and speech
recognition.

A unified distributional model?
We have addressed a range of issues in this article that
are at times associated with DSMs. In many cases, we
have argued that most of these issues are not inherent
to DSMs per se and can be solved with appropriate
model architectures: Incremental models such as
BEAGLE or word2vec do not rely on implausible learning assumptions, multimodal DSMs are not dependent
on language experience alone, and topic models do
not produce arbitrary, noninterpretable semantic dimensions. All of these approaches constitute valuable
proofs of concept for the possibilities within the general
DSM approach. However, it is also obvious that, at this
point, we have different models designed to address
different issues. From a theoretical point of view, this

1024
is unsatisfying (Rogers & Wolmetz, 2016): If DSMs are
to serve as a plausible model of semantic representation, there should be a unified DSM architecture that
can address all issues simultaneously. A similar argument holds for the data on which the models are trained
(as discussed in the previous section): If different training data are needed for different models or to address
different phenomena, this clearly comes at the cost of
generalizability.
A necessary condition for the implementation of a
unified DSM is that the different approaches are not
mutually exclusive. In the case of the three examples
described above, the model architectures should be
compatible with one another: Incremental models rely
on specific learning algorithms that process chunks of
data successively; multimodal DSMs rely on different
input channels for different types of data and need a
mechanism to merge these channels; and topic models
represent words as distributions over topics (and vice
versa). For all pairwise combinations, these approaches
have been shown to be compatible: The multimodal
skip-gram model by Lazaridou et al. (2017) incorporates
an incremental learning algorithm as implemented in the
word2vec model (Mikolov, Chen, et al., 2013; Mikolov,
Sutskever, et al., 2013). Steyvers (2010) demonstrated
that perceptual data—here in the form of feature
norms—can be integrated in topic models alongside
textual data (see also Andrews et al., 2009). Finally, topic
models can also be built incrementally (AlSumait, Barbará,
& Domeniconi, 2008). Thus, it should in principle be
possible to design a mechanism that incrementally builds
a topic model from different kinds of input data.
We therefore believe that a unified DSM can be
designed and advocate this to be an objective of future
research. As in any scientific field, theory and model
development within the DSM framework would benefit
from a cumulative and nested approach (cf. Jacobs &
Grainger, 1994). Under this approach, an existing model
should be adjusted and extended to incorporate new
mechanisms and to account for new results rather than
crafting novel architectures that do not consider previous insights.

A variety of tasks for semantic memory
Any model claiming to be a general-level model of
semantic memory has to satisfy at least two criteria:
First, it has to successfully predict human behavior
across the wide range of tasks in which semantic memory plays a role, including behavioral data it was not
designed for and not trained on; second, its performance should be as close to actual human performance
in these tasks as possible. Thus, a model should not

Günther et al.
fail in tasks that humans are able to perform or vastly
outperform humans (which computational models at
times tend to do).
In most respects, DSMs serve these criteria quite
well. They were conceived as models of semantic memory in the late 1990s without being tailored for any
specific task. Follow-up research has since shown that
they account quite well for human behavior across a
variety of tasks without being explicitly designed for
them (e.g., Bullinaria & Levy, 2012; Jones et al., 2006;
Louwerse, 2011; Mandera et al., 2017). Thus, the necessary criteria for serving as general-level models of
semantic memory are satisfied. Yet there are still open
issues. First, DSMs do not perform equally well in all
tasks. For example, they tend to perform extremely well
in relatively explicit meaning judgment tasks, such as
synonym tests (Bullinaria & Levy, 2012), similarity judgments (Bruni et al., 2014), or categorization tasks
(Baroni & Lenci, 2010), but do not perform as well in
other tasks, such as semantic priming (Hutchison,
Balota, Cortese, & Watson, 2008; Mandera et al., 2017)
or free associations (Kennett, Levi, Anaki, & Faust, 2017;
Nematzadeh et al., 2017). 7
Furthermore, not all DSMs perform equally well
across all tasks. For example, although the word2vec
model tends to outperform more traditional models
across almost all tasks (such as similarity judgments,
categorizations, synonym tests, and semantic priming;
Baroni, Dinu, & Kruszewski, 2014; Mandera et al., 2017;
Pereira et al., 2016), it is in turn outperformed by topic
models in predicting free associations (Nematzadeh
et al., 2017). DSMs also usually have a number of free
parameters (e.g., number of dimensions or context size)
that also have differential effects on their performance
for different tasks (Bullinaria & Levy, 2007, 2012).
It would be ideal to have one single DSM with a
fixed set of parameters that can predict human behavior
across the entire range of semantic memory-related
tasks with a high accuracy. Obviously, this is a very
ambitious objective—at this point, we cannot predict
whether it is bound to succeed, which ultimately
remains an empirical question. However, we again want
to advocate converging on a unified DSM instead of
crafting many different models specifically designed to
shine in exactly one task. Although this is a valid strategy for language engineering, it is only of limited helpfulness in building a unified model and theory of the
human semantic memory.

Learning beyond co-occurrence patterns
By definition, DSMs define learning as observing and
abstracting the distributional patterns of entities over

Vector-Space Models From a Cognitive Perspective
contexts (or co-occurrence patterns) in the vast amount
of experience available to people. In the earlier sections, we discussed that this is not limited to linguistic
entities but can instead be applied to all different kinds
of entities, including the general domains of perception
and action. By applying this broader definition, DSMs
can seamlessly be integrated with embodied and
grounded models of cognition, which also rely heavily
on the notion of co-occurrence (Zwaan & Madden,
2005).
One main question remains open: Can all kinds of
human learning be broken down in terms of distributional learning? For learning mechanisms that are not
necessarily defined in terms of distributional patterns,
possible solutions can be imagined: For example, evaluative conditioning (learning to like or dislike stimuli;
De Houwer, Thomas, & Baeyens, 2001; Levey & Martin,
1975) can be conceptualized as distributional patterns
of stimuli over evaluative psychological states. Admittedly, this operationalization might be difficult to actually implement in a real-world scenario. However, on
a conceptual level, we argue that all types of learning
that can be traced back to a process of classical conditioning or association learning (as is the case for, e.g.,
evaluative conditioning; De Houwer et al., 2001) can
be translated into distributional patterns.
At the same time, there are certainly cases in which
conceptualizations of learning scenarios as co-occurrence
patterns reach their limit. A possible example is one-shot
learning, which describes how humans, and especially
children, are sometimes able to learn new concepts
from just a single exposition (Landau, Smith, & Jones,
1988). This seems out of the scope of distributional
models, which usually learn their representations from
vast amounts of data. This is rooted in the assumption
that DSMs learn semantic representations from the repetition and abstraction of co-occurrence patterns. Thus,
because they are explicitly modeled to transcend episodic memory, they cannot easily model phenomena
associated with it. Despite there being computational
models that successfully model one-shot learning (Lake,
Salakhutdinov, & Tenenbaum, 2015), these rely on a
different model architecture than current DSMs, and it
is currently unclear whether the two approaches can
be combined into a general-purpose model architecture
(although models such as word2vec seem to be potential candidates for this task, and studies relying on such
architectures have shown that they can learn new concepts from minimal exposure; Lazaridou et al., 2017).
Furthermore, current DSMs are heavily focused on
the stimulus level of learning. In most cases, the entities
as well as the contexts in which they occur are defined
in terms of stimuli, such as words, documents, or visual
features in multimodal models. There is, however, a

1025
large body of psychological literature demonstrating
that learning is more than just passively encoding and
observing a stream of stimuli: Factors such as attention
(Gottlieb, 2012; Grossberg, 1999), motivation (Dweck,
1986), emotion (Hascher, 2010), or personality traits
(Corr, Pickering, & Gray, 1995), among many others,
all can influence learning and the way that people
organize the experience they make. Although research
on DSMs has undertaken some first steps in the direction of integrating these factors into the models (for
a word2vec-based model implementing some basic—
not necessarily psychologically motivated—attentional
mechanisms, see Ling et al., 2015), this line of work
is still in its infancy and requires considerable amounts
of additional research.
Another critical issue in the DSM approach to learning is that the learner is essentially conceptualized as
a passive recipient of experience, an observer. Although
this is certainly an important aspect of language acquisition, it does not consider that humans are also active
learners that interact with the world and other humans.
It has been argued that such interactions with the
world and with others play a central role in constituting people’s semantic representations (e.g., Glenberg,
2015; Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002). This view receives
strong empirical support from recent studies in artificial intelligence, in which artificial agents learn semantic representations for initially meaningless symbols
through communication with each other, updating
them on the basis of whether a communicative act was
successful (e.g., Spranger, 2012; Spranger, Pauw,
Loetzsch, & Steels, 2012). From such a perspective, the
co-occurrence of words follows from the agents’ communication and the structure of their environment
rather than constituting the basis of their semantic
representations (cf. Louwerse, 2011). This corresponds
to a weak version of the distributional hypothesis,
assuming that a word’s distribution follows from its
meaning (Lenci, 2008).
The human acquisition of semantic representation
surely entails both processes: the construction of
semantic representations on the basis of the distributional structure of entities in their environment (passive
observation) as well as the interaction with the environment and communication about it (active engagement).
Investigating the relative role of these processes, also
with respect to the time course of language acquisition,
remains a central, open issue for future research.

Conclusion
Mental representations of the world are a highly powerful cognitive tool that enables people to successfully
navigate in and properly interact with their environment

Günther et al.

1026
and help them to structure the endless and overwhelming stream of information to which they are continuously exposed. However, each person experiences a
highly idiosyncratic environment, specific to time, location, culture, and the people surrounding them, and also
subject to constant change. Mental representations of
the world are hence most useful if they are shaped
through these specific experiences. In this sense, learning consists in people’s perpetually tuning their cognitive systems to the environment in which they live and
the experiences they have (Ramscar, Hendrix, Love, &
Baayen, 2013). And indeed, humans excel in capturing
and learning statistical regularities and patterns in their
environment across many different domains (Perruchet
& Pacton, 2006; Saffran, 2003). As stated by Anderson
and Schooler (1991), “human memory mirrors, with a
remarkable degree of fidelity, the structure that exists
in the environment” (p. 404).
DSMs seem to take on this function. Taking together
the literature reviewed in the current article, a common
overarching theme is that statistical regularities and
redundancies—here in the form of co-occurrences and
distributional patterns—entail information that can give
rise to rich mental representations and to cognitive
phenomena usually described through high-level concepts (see Westbury, 2016). In order to build these
representations, people “just” need to extract this statistical information from their experiences through
some powerful learning mechanisms. Somewhat rather
surprisingly given the complexity of the stream of information people are exposed to, it seems that such powerful mechanisms can actually be rather simple: A
common element between all the approaches reviewed
here is that they focus on the informative relation
between two units—if the presence or absence of one
stimulus is a valid cue for the presence or absence of
another stimulus—rather than their simple co-presence
(Rescorla & Wagner, 1972). Further, these models not
only rely on local co-occurrences but also consider
global co-occurrence patterns to structure the incoming
information (Landauer & Dumais, 1997). Just think of
two bus drivers on your line that you probably never
see together but always in the same context: the same
bus, the same time, the same route. Even though you
see only one of them at any given time, your representations of them will nevertheless be highly similar.
How does language come into this picture? On the
one hand, language itself provides stimuli that people
experience on a very regular basis and that occur in
the context of other linguistic and nonlinguistic stimuli
(as extensively discussed in the final section of the
article; see also Zannino, Caltagirone, & Carlesimo,
2015). As a result, the linguistic system is ideally suited
to be a learning environment. On the other hand,

language serves a crucial function as “experience by
proxy” ( Johnson-Laird, 1983), allowing us to transfer
experiences across persons, across space, and even
across time. People can therefore build mental representations of the world that are potentially informed by
the experience of an entire species and truly stand on
the shoulders of giants who help them navigate through
this world (Harari, 2014).
Action Editor
Laura A. King served as action editor for this article.

ORCID iD
Fritz Günther

https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9205-6786

Acknowledgments
We thank the participants and speakers at Concepts in Action:
Representation, Learning, and Application (CARLA) 2018
(Osnabrück, Germany) and the Italian Society of Neuropsychology (SINP) 2017 (Palermo, Italy) for many helpful and
insightful discussions that inspired many sections of this
article. We also thank Anna Borghi and Art Glenberg for many
valuable comments and discussions on earlier versions of this
manuscript. Finally, we thank Marc Brysbaert, Mike Jones,
and two anonymous reviewers for their very constructive
feedback to earlier versions of this manuscript and Laura
A. King for her support in the editorial process.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared that there were no conflicts of interest
with respect to the authorship or the publication of this
article.

Funding
This work was supported by German Research Foundation
Research Fellowship 392225719 (to F. Günther) and by
Fondazione Cariplo–Regione Lombardia Grant 2017-1633 (to
M. Marelli).

Notes
1. These arguments are presented in more detail later in the
article.
2. Recent prediction-based models such as word2vec are implemented using a different architecture, but this architecture in
many respects is based on a similar rationale as the traditional
models (Levy & Goldberg, 2014b). We describe the word2vec
algorithm in more detail later in the article.
3. We should also note at this point that, when the issue of
cognitive plausibility at the algorithmic level is taken seriously,
the source corpus from which the distributional vectors are
estimated plays a more important role than in the context of
engineering solutions. For a cognitive model, the corpus should
itself be plausible in the sense that it serves as a good reflection of the actual experience made by a human, preferably in
structure as well as in size.

Vector-Space Models From a Cognitive Perspective
4. Note, however, that the reliance on well-defined features can
also be framed as a problem of such theoretical approaches
rather than a problem of feature-free models of meaning; see,
for example, Westbury (2016) for arguments along this line.
5. Capital letters are is used to indicate concepts: The English
word cat and the German word Katze both refer to the same
concept, CAT.
6. Latent semantic analysis is described as a bag-of-word model
because it takes as input only a matrix specifying the word-bydocument occurrences without any concern of their structure.
It would derive exactly the same distributional vectors if the
order of words within a document was randomized or sorted
alphabetically.
7. Note that these studies did not consider asymmetrical similarity measures as proposed by Kintsch (2014), which might be
more adequate for free associations.

References
AlSumait, L., Barbará, D., & Domeniconi, C. (2008). On-line
LDA: Adaptive topic models for mining text streams with
applications to topic detection and tracking. In Proceedings
of the 2008 Eighth IEEE International Conference on Data
Mining (pp. 3–12). Washington, DC: Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers.
Anderson, J. R., & Schooler, L. J. (1991). Reflections of the
environment in memory. Psychological Science, 2, 396–
408.
Andrews, M., Vigliocco, G., & Vinson, D. (2009). Integrating
experiential and distributional data to learn semantic representations. Psychological Review, 116, 463–498.
Annesi, P., Croce, D., & Basili, R. (2013). Towards compositional tree kernels. In O. Popescu & A. Lavelli (Eds.),
Proceedings of the joint symposium on semantic processing. Textual inference and structures in corpora (pp.
15–23). Stroudsburg, PA: Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Arora, S., Ge, R., & Moitra, A. (2012). Learning topic models –
Going beyond SVD. In Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE 53rd
Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
(pp. 1–10). Washington, DC: Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers.
Baroni, M., Bernardi, R., & Zamparelli, R. (2014). Frege in
space: A program for compositional distributional semantics. Linguistic Issues in Language Technologies, 9(6),
5–110.
Baroni, M., Dinu, G., & Kruszewski, G. (2014). Don’t count,
predict! A systematic comparison of context-counting vs.
context-predicting semantic vectors. In K. Toutanova &
H. Wu (Eds.), Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol. 1, pp.
238–247). Stroudsburg, PA: Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Baroni, M., & Lenci, A. (2010). Distributional memory: A
general framework for corpus-based semantics. Computa­
tional Linguistics, 36, 673–721.
Baroni, M., Murphy, B., Barbu, E., & Poesio, M. (2010). Strudel:
A corpus-based semantic model based on properties and
types. Cognitive Science, 34, 222–254.

1027
Baroni, M., & Zamparelli, R. (2010). Nouns are vectors,
adjectives are matrices: Representing adjective-noun
constructions in semantic space. In Proceedings of the
conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (pp. 1183–1193). Stroudsburg, PA: Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral
& Brain Sciences, 22, 637–660.
Bhatia, S. (2017a). Associative judgment and vector space
semantics. Psychological Review, 124, 1–20.
Bhatia, S. (2017b). The semantic representation of prejudice
and stereotypes. Cognition, 164, 46–60.
Biemann, C., & Riedl, M. (2013). Text: Now in 2d! A framework for lexical expansion with contextual similarity.
Journal of Language Modelling, 1, 55–95.
Bierwisch, M. (2011). Semantic features and primes. In
C. Maienborn, K. von Heusinger, & P. Portner (Eds.),
Semantics: An international handbook of natural language meaning (Vol. 1, pp. 322–357). Berlin, Germany:
de Gruyter.
Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., & Jordan, M. I. (2003). Latent Dirichlet
allocation. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3,
993–1022.
Bojanowski, P., Grave, E., Joulin, A., & Mikolov, T. (2017).
Enriching word vectors with subword information.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 5, 135–146.
Boleda, G., Padó, S., & Utt, J. (2012). Regular polysemy: A distributional model. In Proceedings of the first joint conference on lexical and computational semantics (Vol. 1, pp.
151–160). Stroudsburg, PA: Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Borghesani, V., & Piazza, M. (2017). The neuro-cognitive
representations of symbols: The case of concrete words.
Neuropsychologia, 105, 4–17.
Borghi, A. M., Binkofski, F., Castelfranchi, C., Cimatti, F.,
Scorolli, C., & Tummolini, L. (2017). The challenge of
abstract concepts. Psychological Bulletin, 143, 263–292.
Borghi, A. M., Glenberg, A. M., & Kaschak, M. P. (2004).
Putting words in perspective. Memory & Cognition, 32,
863–873.
Bruni, E., Tran, N.-K., & Baroni, M. (2014). Multimodal distributional semantics. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
Research, 49, 1–47.
Brysbaert, M., Mandera, P., & Keuleers, E. (2018). The word
frequency effect in word processing: An updated review.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 27, 45–50.
Buitelaar, P., Cimiano, P., & Magnini, B. (2005). Ontology
learning from text: An overview. In P. Buitelaar, P.
Cimiano, & B. Magnini (Eds.), Ontology learning from
text: Methods, evaluation and applications (pp. 3–12).
Amsterdam, the Netherlands: IOS Press.
Bullinaria, J. A., & Levy, J. P. (2007). Extracting semantic representations from word co-occurrence statistics: A computational study. Behavior Research Methods, 39, 510–526.
Bullinaria, J. A., & Levy, J. P. (2012). Extracting semantic
representations from word co-occurrence statistics: Stoplists, stemming, and SVD. Behavior Research Methods,
44, 890–907.

1028
Caliskan, A., Bryson, J. J., & Narayanan, A. (2017). Semantics
derived automatically from language corpora contain
human-like biases. Science, 356, 183–186.
Camacho-Collados, J., & Pilehvar, T. (2018). From word to
sense embeddings: A survey on vector representations
of meaning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
63, 743–788.
Chang, J., Gerrish, S., Wang, C., Boyd-Graber, J. L., & Blei,
D. M. (2009). Reading tea leaves: How humans interpret
topic models. In Y. Bengio, D. Schuurmans, J. Lafferty, C.
Williams, & A. Culotta (Eds.), Advances in neural information processing systems 22 (pp. 288–296). Red Hook,
NY: Curran Associates.
Church, K. W., & Hanks, P. (1990). Word association norms,
mutual information, and lexicography. Computational
Linguistics, 16, 22–29.
Cohen, T., & Widdows, D. (2009). Empirical distributional
semantics: Methods and biomedical applications. Journal
of Biomedical Informatics, 42, 390–405.
Collins, A. M., & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreading-activation
theory of semantic processing. Psychological Review, 82,
207–428.
Corr, P. J., Pickering, A. D., & Gray, J. A. (1995). Personality
and reinforcement in associative and instrumental learning. Personality and Individual Differences, 19, 47–71.
De Houwer, J., Thomas, S., & Baeyens, F. (2001). Association
learning of likes and dislikes: A review of 25 years of
research on human evaluative conditioning. Psychological
Bulletin, 127, 853–869.
Dennis, S. (2007). How to use the LSA website. In T. K.
Landauer, D. S. McNamara, S. Dennis, & W. Kintsch
(Eds.), Handbook of latent semantic analysis (pp. 57–70).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
De Vega, M., Glenberg, A., & Graesser, A. (2012). Symbols
and embodiment: Debates on meaning and cognition.
Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Dinu, G., & Lapata, M. (2010). Measuring distributional
similarity in context. In Proceedings of the conference
on empirical methods in natural language processing (pp. 1162–1172). Stroudsburg, PA: Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Dinu, G., Pham, N., & Baroni, M. (2013). DISSECT: DIStributional
SEmantics Composition Toolkit. In 51st Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL
2013): System demonstrations (pp. 31–36). Stroudsburg,
PA: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Dreyer, F. R., & Pulvermüller, F. (2018). Abstract semantics
in the motor system? An event-related fMRI study on passive reading of semantic word categories carrying abstract
emotional and mental meaning. Cortex, 100, 52–70.
Dudschig, C., Maienborn, C., & Kaup, B. (2016). Is there a difference between stripy journeys and stripy ladybirds? The
N400 response to semantic and world-knowledge violations during sentence processing. Brain and Cognition,
103, 38–49.
Durda, K., Buchanan, L., & Caron, R. (2009). Grounding cooccurrence: Identifying features in a lexical co-occurrence
model of semantic memory. Behavior Research Methods,
41, 1210–1223.

Günther et al.
Dweck, C. S. (1986). Motivational processes affecting learning. American Psychologist, 41, 1040–1048.
Elvevåg, B., Foltz, P. W., Weinberger, D. R., & Goldberg, T. E.
(2007). Quantifying incoherence in speech: An automated
methodology and novel application to schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia Research, 93, 304–316.
Evangelopoulos, N., Zhang, X., & Prybutok, V. R. (2012).
Latent semantic analysis: Five methodological recommendations. European Journal of Information Systems,
21, 70–86.
Firth, J. R. (1957). Papers in linguistics, 1934–1951. Oxford,
England: Oxford University Press.
French, R. M., & Labiouse, C. (2002). Four problems with
extracting human semantics from large text corpora. In W.
D. Gray & C. D. Schunn (Eds.), Proceedings of the TwentyFourth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 316–322). New York, NY: Routledge.
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D. G. (1996). Reasoning the
fast and frugal way: Models of bounded rationality.
Psychological Review, 103, 650–669.
Glenberg, A. M. (2015). Few believe the world is flat: How
embodiment is changing the scientific understanding of
cognition. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology,
69, 165–171.
Glenberg, A. M., Gutierrez, T., Levin, J. R., Japuntich, S.,
& Kaschak, M. P. (2004). Activity and imagined activity
can enhance young children’s reading comprehension.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 96, 424–436.
Glenberg, A. M., & Kaschak, M. P. (2002). Grounding language
in action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 558–565.
Glenberg, A. M., & Mehta, S. (2008). Constraints on covariation: ItâÅŹs not meaning. Italian Journal of Linguistics,
20, 241–264.
Glenberg, A. M., & Robertson, D. A. (2000). Symbol grounding and meaning: A comparison of high-dimensional and
embodies theories of meaning. Journal of Memory and
Language, 43, 379–401.
Gluck, M. A., & Bower, G. H. (1988). From conditioning to
category learning: An adaptive network model. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 117, 227–247.
Goldberg, R. F., Perfetti, C. A., & Schneider, W. (2006).
Perceptual knowledge retrieval activates sensory brain
regions. Journal of Neuroscience, 26, 4917–4921.
Gottlieb, J. (2012). Attention, learning, and the value of information. Neuron, 76, 281–295.
Greenwald, A. G., McGhee, D. E., & Schwartz, J. L. (1998).
Measuring individual differences in implicit cognition:
The implicit association test. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 74, 1464–1480.
Griffiths, T., Steyvers, M., & Tenenbaum, J. (2007). Topics
in semantic representation. Psychological Review, 114,
211–244.
Grossberg, S. (1999). The link between brain learning, attention,
and consciousness. Consciousness and Cognition, 8, 1–44.
Günther, F., Dudschig, C., & Kaup, B. (2015). LSAfun–An
R package for computations based on Latent Semantic
Analysis. Behavior Research Methods, 47, 930–944.
Günther, F., Dudschig, C., & Kaup, B. (2016). Latent semantic analysis cosines as a cognitive similarity measure:

Vector-Space Models From a Cognitive Perspective
Evidence from priming studies. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 69, 626–653.
Günther, F., & Marelli, M. (2016). Understanding karma
police: The perceived plausibility of noun compounds as
predicted by distributional models of semantic representation. PLOS ONE, 11(10), Article e0163200. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0163200
Günther, F., & Marelli, M. (2018). Enter sandman: Compound
processing and semantic transparency in a compositional perspective. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition. Advance online publication. doi:10.1037/xlm0000677
Günther, F., Smolka, E., & Marelli, M. (2019). ‘Understanding’
differs between English and German: Capturing systematic language differences of complex words. Cortex, 116,
168–175. doi:10.1016/j.cortex.2018.09.007
Hagoort, P., Hald, L., Bastiaansen, M., & Petersson, K. M.
(2004). Integration of word meaning and world knowledge in language comprehension. Science, 304, 438–441.
Hansson, K., Bååth, R., Löhndorf, S., Sahlén, B., & Sikström,
S. (2016). Quantifying semantic linguistic maturity in children. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 45, 1183–1199.
Harari, Y. N. (2014). The tree of knowledge. In Sapiens: A
brief history of humankind (pp. 20–40). London, England:
Random House.
Harris, Z. (1954). Distributional structure. Word, 10, 146–162.
Hascher, T. (2010). Learning and emotion: Perspectives for
theory and research. European Educational Research
Journal, 9, 13–28.
Hasson, U., Egidi, G., Marelli, M., & Willems, R. M. (2018).
Grounding the neurobiology of language in first principles: The necessity of non-language-centric explanations
for language comprehension. Cognition, 180, 135–157.
Heider, E. R., & Olivier, D. C. (1972). The structure of the
color space in naming and memory for two languages.
Cognitive Psychology, 3, 337–354.
Hendrix, P. (2019). A word or two about nonwords: Nonword
frequency and semantic neighborhood density effects in
the lexical decision task. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Herdağdelen, A., & Marelli, M. (2017). Social media and language processing: How Facebook and Twitter provide the
best frequency estimates for studying word recognition.
Cognitive Science, 41, 976–995.
Heylen, K., Wielfaert, T., Speelman, D., & Geeraerts, D.
(2015). Monitoring polysemy: Word space models as a
tool for large-scale lexical semantic analysis. Lingua, 157,
153–172.
Hoffman, P., McClelland, J. L., & Lambon Ralph, M. A. (2018).
Concepts, control, and context: A connectionist account of
normal and disordered semantic cognition. Psychological
Review, 125, 293–328.
Hollis, G. (2017). Estimating the average need of semantic
knowledge from distributional semantic models. Memory
& Cognition, 45, 1350–1370.
Hollis, G., & Westbury, C. (2016). The principals of meaning: Extracting semantic dimensions from co-occurrence
models of semantics. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 23,
1744–1756.

1029
Howell, S. R., Jankowicz, D., & Becker, S. (2005). A model
of grounded language acquisition: Sensorimotor features
improve lexical and grammatical learning. Journal of
Memory and Language, 53, 258–276.
Hutchinson, S., & Louwerse, M. M. (2013). What’s up can be
explained by language statistics. In M. Knauff, M. Pauen,
N. Sebanz, & I. Wachsmuth (Eds.), Proceedings of the
35th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 2596–2601). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Hutchison, K. A., Balota, D. A., Cortese, M., & Watson, J. M.
(2008). Predicting semantic priming at the item level. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 61, 1036–
1066.
Jackendoff, R. (2003). Précis of foundations of language:
Brain, meaning, grammar, evolution. Behavioral & Brain
Sciences, 26, 651–665.
Jacobs, A. M., & Grainger, J. (1994). Models of visual word
recognition: Sampling the state of the art. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 20, 1311–1334.
Jenkins, J. J. (1954). Transitional organization: Association
techniques. In C. E. Osgood & T. A. Sebeok (Eds.),
Psycholinguistics. A survey of theory and research problems
(pp. 112–118). Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Johns, B. T., Jones, M., & Mewhort, D. J. (2016). Experience as
a free parameter in the cognitive modeling of language. In
A. Papafragou, D. Grodner, D. Mirman, & J. C. Trueswell
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 38th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2291–2296). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Johns, B. T., & Jones, M. N. (2012). Perceptual inference
through global lexical similarity. Topics in Cognitive
Science, 4, 103–120.
Johnson, K. (2008). An overview of lexical semantics.
Philosophy Compass, 3, 119–134.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models: Towards a cognitive science of language, inference, and consciousness.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Jones, M. N., Kintsch, W., & Mewhort, D. J. K. (2006). Highdimensional semantic space accounts of priming. Journal
of Memory and Language, 55, 534–552.
Jones, M. N., & Mewhort, D. J. K. (2007). Representing word
meaning and order information in a composite holographic lexicon. Psychological Review, 114, 1–37.
Jones, M. N., Willits, J., & Dennis, S. (2015). Models of semantic memory. In J. Busemeyer, Z. Wang, J. Townsend, &
A. Eidels (Eds.), Oxford handbook of mathematical and
computational psychology (pp. 232–254). New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Jorge-Botana, G., León, J. A., Olmos, R., & Hassan-Montero, Y.
(2010). Visualizing polysemy using LSA and the predication algorithm. Journal of the Association for Information
Science and Technology, 61, 1706–1724.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1973). On the psychology of
prediction. Psychological Review, 80, 237–251.
Kaschak, M. P., & Glenberg, A. M. (2000). Constructing meaning: The role of affordances and grammatical constructions in sentence comprehension. Journal of Memory and
Language, 43, 508–529.

1030
Kennett, Y. N., Levi, E., Anaki, D., & Faust, M. (2017). The
semantic distance task: Quantifying semantic distance with
semantic network path length. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 43, 1470–
1489.
Kiela, D., Bulat, L., & Clark, S. (2015). Grounding semantics in
olfactory perception. In Z. Chengqing & M. Strube (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics and the 7th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(Vol. 2, pp. 231–236). Stroudsburg, PA: Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Kiela, D., & Clark, S. (2015). Multi- and cross-modal semantics beyond vision: Grounding in auditory perception. In
Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2015) (pp. 2461–
2470). Stroudsburg, PA: Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Kintsch, W. (1988). The use of knowledge in discourse processing: A construction-integration model. Psychological
Review, 95, 163–182.
Kintsch, W. (2000). Metaphor comprehension: A computational theory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7, 257–266.
Kintsch, W. (2001). Predication. Cognitive Science, 25, 173–202.
Kintsch, W. (2014). Similarity as a function of semantic distance and amount of knowledge. Psychological Review,
121, 559–561.
Kirkham, N. Z., Slemmer, J. A., & Johnson, S. P. (2002). Visual
statistical learning in infancy: Evidence for a domain general learning mechanism. Cognition, 83, B35–B42.
Kowialiewski, B., & Majerus, S. (2018). The non-strategic
nature of linguistic long-term memory effects in verbal
short-term memory. Journal of Memory and Language,
101, 64–83.
Lake, B. M., Salakhutdinov, R., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2015).
Human-level concept learning through probabilistic program induction. Science, 350, 1332–1338.
Landau, B., Smith, L. B., & Jones, S. S. (1988). The importance
of shape in early lexical learning. Cognitive Development,
3, 299–321.
Landauer, T. K. (2007). LSA as a theory of meaning. In T. K.
Landauer, D. S. McNamara, S. Dennis, & W. Kintsch
(Eds.), Handbook of latent semantic analysis (pp. 3–34).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to Plato’s
problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge.
Psychological Review, 104, 211–240.
Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P. W., & Laham, D. (1998). Introduction
to latent semantic analysis. Discourse Processes, 25, 259–
284.
Landauer, T. K., McNamara, D. S., Dennis, S., & Kintsch, W.
(2007). Handbook of latent semantic analysis. Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Lang, E., & Maienborn, C. (2011). Two-level semantics:
Semantic form and conceptual structure. In C. Maienborn,
K. von Heusinger, & P. Portner (Eds.), Semantics: An
international handbook of natural language meaning
(Vol. 1, pp. 709–740). Berlin, Germany: de Gruyter.

Günther et al.
Lau, M. C., Goh, W. D., & Yap, M. J. (2018). An item-level
analysis of lexical-semantic effects in free recall and recognition memory using the megastudy approach. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 71, 2207–
2222. doi:10.1177/1747021817739834
Lazaridou, A., Bruni, E., & Baroni, M. (2014). Is this a wampimuk? Cross-modal mapping between distributional
semantics and the visual world. In K. Toutanova & H.
Wu (Eds.), Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol.
1, pp. 1403–1414). Stroudsburg, PA: Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Lazaridou, A., Marelli, M., & Baroni, M. (2017). Multimodal
word meaning induction from minimal exposure to natural text. Cognitive Science, 41, 677–705.
Lazaridou, A., Pham, N. T., & Baroni, M. (2015). Combining
language and vision with a multimodal skip-gram model.
In R. Mihalcea, J. Chai, & A. Sarkar (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 2015 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
language technologies (pp. 153–163). Stroudsburg, PA:
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Lee, D. D., & Seung, H. S. (1999). Learning the parts of
objects by non-negative matrix factorization. Nature, 401,
788–791.
Lemaire, B., & Denhière, G. (2004). Incremental construction
of an associative network from a corpus. In K. Forbus, D.
Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings of the TwentySixth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 825–830). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lenci, A. (2008). Distributional semantics in linguistic and
cognitive research. Rivista di Linguistica, 20(1), 1–31.
Lenci, A. (2018). Distributional models of word meaning.
Annual Review of Linguistics, 4, 151–171.
Lenci, A., & Benotto, G. (2012). Identifying hypernyms in distributional semantic spaces. In E. Agirre et al. (Eds.), First
Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics
(*SEM) (pp. 75–79). Stroudsburg, PA: Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Lenton, A. P., Sedikides, C., & Bruder, M. (2009). A latent
semantic analysis of gender stereotype-consistency and
narrowness in American English. Sex Roles, 60, 269–278.
Levey, A. B., & Martin, I. (1975). Classical conditioning of
human ‘evaluative’ responses. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 13, 221–226.
Levy, O., & Goldberg, Y. (2014a). Linguistic regularities
in sparse and explicit word representations. In H. T.
Ng et al. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 18th Conference
on Computational Natural Language Learning: Shared
task (pp. 171–180). Stroudsburg, PA: Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Levy, O., & Goldberg, Y. (2014b). Neural word embedding as implicit matrix factorization. In Z. Ghahramani,
M. Welling, C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, & K. Weinberger
(Eds.), Advances in neural information processing systems
(NIPS) (Vol. 27, pp. 2177–2185). Red Hook, NY: Curran
Associates.
Lewicki, P. (1986). Processing information about covariations that cannot be articulated. Journal of Experimental

Vector-Space Models From a Cognitive Perspective
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 12, 135–
146.
Lewicki, P., Czyzewska, M., & Hoffman, H. (1987). Un­con­
scious acquisition of complex procedural knowledge.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 13, 523–530.
Lin, D. (1998). Automatic retrieval and clustering of similar words. In Proceedings of the 17th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics (Vol. 2, pp.
768–774). Stroudsburg, PA: Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Ling, W., Tsvetkov, Y., Amir, S., Fermandez, R., Dyer, C.,
Black, A. W., . . . Lin, C.-C. (2015). Not all contexts are
created equal: Better word representations with variable
attention. In L. Màrquez, C. Callison-Burch, & J. Su (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) (pp. 1367–
1372). Stroudsburg, PA: Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Lopopolo, A., & Miltenburg, E. (2015). Sound-based distributional models. In M. Purver, M. Sadrzadeh, & M. Stone
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 11th International Conference
on Computational Semantics (pp. 70–75). Stroudsburg,
PA: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Louwerse, M. M. (2011). Symbol interdependency in symbolic
and embodied cognition. Topics in Cognitive Science, 3,
273–302.
Louwerse, M. M., & Benesh, N. (2012). Representing spatial
structure through maps and language: Lord of the Rings
encodes the spatial structure of Middle Earth. Cognitive
Science, 36, 1556–1569.
Louwerse, M. M., & Connell, L. (2011). A taste of words:
Linguistic context and perceptual simulation predict the
modality of words. Cognitive Science, 35, 381–398.
Louwerse, M. M., Raisig, S., Tillman, R., & Hutchinson, S.
(2015). Time after time in words: Chronology through language statistics. In D. C. Noelle et al. (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 37th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 1428–1433). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Louwerse, M. M., & Zwaan, R. A. (2009). Language encodes
geographical information. Cognitive Science, 33, 51–73.
Lund, K., & Burgess, C. (1996). Producing high-dimensional
semantic spaces from lexical co-occurrence. Behavior
Research Methods, Instrumentation, and Computers, 28,
201–208.
Lynott, D., & Ramscar, M. J. A. (2001). Can we model conceptual combination using distributional information? In
D. O’Donoghue (Ed.), Proceedings of the Twelfth Irish
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Cognitive Science
(pp. 1–10). Maynooth, Ireland: Maynooth University.
Mandera, P., Keuleers, E., & Brysbaert, M. (2017). Explaining
human performance in psycholinguistic tasks with models
of semantic similarity based on prediction and counting:
A review and empirical validation. Journal of Memory and
Language, 92, 57–78.
Marelli, M., & Baroni, M. (2015). Affixation in semantic space:
Modeling morpheme meanings with compositional distributional semantics. Psychological Review, 122, 485–515.

1031
Marelli, M., Gagné, C. L., & Spalding, T. L. (2017). Compoun­
ding as abstract operation in semantic space: A data-driven,
large-scale model for relational effects in the pro­cessing
of novel compounds. Cognition, 166, 207–224.
Martin, D. I., & Berry, M. W. (2007). Mathematical foundations
behind latent semantic analysis. In T. K. Landauer, D. S.
McNamara, S. Dennis, & W. Kintsch (Eds.), Handbook
of latent semantic analysis (pp. 35–56). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
McKoon, G., & Ratcliff, R. (1998). Memory-based language
processing: Psycholinguistic research in the 1990s. Annual
Review of Psychology, 49, 25–42.
McRae, K., Cree, G. S., Seidenberg, M. S., & McNorgan, C.
(2005). Semantic feature production norms for a large set
of living and nonliving things. Behavior Research Methods,
37, 547–559.
Meteyard, L., Cuadrado, S. R., Bahrami, B., & Vigliocco, G.
(2012). Coming of age: A review of embodiment and the
neuroscience of semantics. Cortex, 48, 788–804.
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., & Dean, J. (2013). Efficient
estimation of word representations in vector space.
Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1301.3781.
Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G., & Dean, J.
(2013). Distributed representations of words and phrases
and their compositionality. In C. J. C. Burges, L. Bottou,
M. Welling, Z. Ghahramani, & K. Q. Weinberger (Eds.),
Advances in neural information processing systems
(NIPS) (Vol. 26, pp. 3111–3119). Red Hook, NY: Curran
Associates.
Mikolov, T., Yih, W.-T., & Zweig, G. (2013). Linguistic
regularities in continuous space word representations.
In L. Vanderwende, H. Daumé III, & K. Kirchhoff
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 2013 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (pp. 746–
751). Stroudsburg, PA: Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Mitchell, J., & Lapata, M. (2010). Composition in distributional
models of semantics. Cognitive Science, 34, 1388–1439.
Mitchell, T. M., Shinkareva, S. V., Carlson, A., Chang, K.-M.,
Malave, V. L., Mason, R. A., & Just, M. A. (2008). Predicting
human brain activity associated with the meanings of
nouns. Science, 320, 1191–1195.
Munoz-Rubke, F., Kafadar, K., & James, K. H. (2018). A new
statistical model for analyzing rating scale data pertaining
to word meaning. Psychological Research, 82, 787–805.
Murdock, B. B. (1982). A theory for the storage and retrieval
of item and associative information. Psychological Review,
89, 609–626.
Nematzadeh, A., Meylan, S. C., & Griffiths, T. L. (2017).
Evaluating vector-space models of word representation,
or, the unreasonable effectiveness of counting words near
other words. In Proceedings of the 39th Annual Meeting
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 859–864). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Nida, E. A. (1979). Componential analysis of meaning: An
introduction to semantic structures (2nd ed.). The Hague,
the Netherlands: Mouton.

1032
Olmos, R., Jorge-Botana, G., León, J. A., & Escudero, I. (2014).
Transforming selected concepts into dimensions in latent
semantic analysis. Discourse Processes, 51, 494–510.
Osgood, C. E. (1952). The nature and measurement of meaning. Psychological Bulletin, 49, 197–237.
Osgood, C. E., Suci, G. J., & Tannenbaum, P. H. (1957). The
measurement of meaning. Urbana: University of Illinois
Press.
Ouyang, L., Boroditsky, L., & Frank, M. C. (2017). Semantic
coherence facilitates distributional learning. Cognitive
Science, 41, 855–884.
Padó, S., & Lapata, M. (2007). Dependency-based construction of semantic space models. Computational Linguistics,
33, 161–199.
Pantel, P., & Lin, D. (2002). Discovering word senses from text. In
Proceedings of the 8th ACM SIGKDD International Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (pp. 613–619).
New York, NY: Association for Computing Machinery.
Pennington, J., Socher, R., & Manning, C. (2014). GloVe:
Global vectors for word representation. In A. Moschitti,
B. Pang, & W. Daelemans (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2014
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP) (pp. 1532–1543). Stroudsburg, PA:
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Pereira, F., Gershman, S., Ritter, S., & Botvinick, M. (2016).
A comparative evaluation of off-the-shelf distributed
semantic representations for modelling behavioural data.
Cognitive Neuropsychology, 33, 175–190.
Perfetti, C. A. (1998). The limits of co-occurrence: Tools and
theories in language research. Discourse Processes, 25,
363–377.
Perruchet, P., & Pacton, S. (2006). Implicit learning and statistical learning: One phenomenon, two approaches. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 10, 233–238.
Pulvermüller, F. (2002). A brain perspective on language
mechanisms: From discrete neuronal ensembles to serial
order. Progress in Neurobiology, 67, 85–111.
Ramscar, M., Hendrix, P., Love, B., & Baayen, R. (2013). Learning
is not decline: The mental lexicon as a window into cognition across the lifespan. The Mental Lexicon, 8, 450–481.
R Core Team. (2019). R: A language and environment for
statistical computing. Vienna, Austria: R Foundation for
Statistical Computing.
Recchia, G., & Jones, M. N. (2009). More data trumps smarter
algorithms: Comparing pointwise mutual information with
latent semantic analysis. Behavior Research Methods, 41,
647–656.
Recchia, G., & Louwerse, M. M. (2016). Archaeology through
computational linguistics: Inscription statistics predict excavation sites of Indus valley artifacts. Cognitive
Science, 40, 2065–2080.
Řehůřek, R., & Sojka, P. (2010). Software framework for topic
modelling with large corpora. In Proceedings of the LREC
2010 Workshop on New Challenges for NLP Frameworks
(pp. 45–50). Paris, France: European Language Resources
Association.
Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A theory of Pavlovian
conditioning: Variations in the effectiveness of reinforcement

Günther et al.
and nonreinforcement. In A. H. Black & W. F. Prokasy
(Eds.), Classical conditioning II: Current research and theory (pp. 64–99). New York, NY: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Riordan, B., & Jones, M. N. (2011). Redundancy in perceptual
and linguistic experience: Comparing feature-based and
distributional models of semantic representation. Topics
in Cognitive Science, 3, 303–345.
Rogers, T. T., Lambon Ralph, M. A., Garrard, P., Bozeat, S.,
McClelland, J. L., Hodges, J. R., & Patterson, K. (2004).
Structure and deterioration of semantic memory: A
neuropsychological and computational investigation.
Psychological Review, 111, 205–235.
Rogers, T. T., & Wolmetz, M. (2016). Conceptual knowledge representation: A cross-section of current research.
Cognitive Neuropsychology, 33, 121–129.
Rommers, J., Dijkstra, T., & Bastiaansen, M. (2013). Contextdependent semantic processing in the human brain:
Evidence from idiom comprehension. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 25, 762–776.
Roy, D., Patel, R., DeCamp, P., Kubat, R., Fleischman, M.,
Roy, B., . . . Gorniak, P. (2006). The human speechtome
project. In P. Vogt, Y. Sugita, E. Tuci, & C. Nehaniv (Eds.),
Symbol grounding and beyond (pp. 192–196). Berlin,
Germany: Springer.
Sadeghi, Z., McClelland, J. L., & Hoffman, P. (2015). You shall
know an object by the company it keeps: An investigation of semantic representations derived from object cooccurrence in visual scenes. Neuropsychologia, 76, 52–61.
Sadoski, M. (2018). Reading comprehension is embodied:
Theoretical and practical considerations. Educational
Psychology Review, 30, 331–349.
Saffran, J. R. (2003). Statistical language learning mechanisms and constraints. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 12, 110–114.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996). Statistical
learning by 8-month-old infants. Science, 274, 1926–1928.
Sahlgren, M. (2005). An introduction to random indexing.
Paper presented at the Methods and Applications of
Semantic Indexing Workshop at the 7th International
Conference on Terminology and Knowledge Engineering
(TKE). Retrieved from http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/view
doc/download?doi=10.1.1.96.2230&rep=rep1&type=pdf.
Sahlgren, M. (2006). The word-space-model (Unpublished
doctoral dissertation). Stockholm University, Stockholm,
Sweden.
Sahlgren, M. (2008). The distributional hypothesis. Rivista di
Linguista, 20, 33–53.
Schmidtke, D., Van Dyke, J. A., & Kuperman, V. (2018).
Individual variability in the semantic processing of English
compound words. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 44, 421–439.
Shaoul, C., & Westbury, C. (2010). Exploring lexical co-occurrence space using HiDEx. Behavior Research Methods,
42, 393–413.
Simmons, W. K., Hamann, S. B., Harenski, C. L., Hu, X. P., &
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). fMRI evidence for word association and situated simulation in conceptual processing.
Journal of Physiology-Paris, 102, 106–119.

Vector-Space Models From a Cognitive Perspective
Sloutsky, V. M., Yim, H., Yao, X., & Dennis, S. (2017). An
associative account of the development of word learning.
Cognitive Psychology, 97, 1–30.
Smith, E. E., & Medin, D. L. (1981). The classical view. In E. E.
Smith & D. L. Medin (Eds.), Categories and concepts (pp.
22–60). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Sommerauer, P., & Fokkens, A. (2018). Firearms and tigers
are dangerous, kitchen knives and zebras are not: Testing
whether word embeddings can tell. In T. Linzen, G.
Chrupała, & A. Alishahi (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2018
EMNLP Workshop Blackbox NLP: Analyzing and Interpreting
Neural Networks for NLP (pp. 276–286). Stroudsburg, PA:
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Spranger, M. (2012). The co-evolution of basic spatial terms
and categories. In L. Steels (Ed.), Experiments in cultural language evolution (pp. 111–141). Amsterdam, the
Netherlands: John Benjamins.
Spranger, M., Pauw, S., Loetzsch, M., & Steels, L. (2012).
Open-ended procedural semantics. In L. Steels & M. Hild
(Eds.), Language grounding in robots (pp. 153–172).
Berlin, Germany: Springer.
Steyvers, M. (2010). Combining feature norms and text data
with topic models. Acta Psychologica, 133, 234–243.
Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (1981). Toward a modern theory of adaptive networks: Expectation and prediction.
Psychological Review, 88, 135–170.
Tabossi, P. (1988). Accessing lexical ambiguity in different types of sentential contexts. Journal of Memory and
Language, 27, 324–340.
Tsvetkov, Y., Faruqui, M., Ling, W., Lample, G., & Dyer, C.
(2015). Evaluation of word vector representations by subspace alignment. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP) (pp. 2049–2054). Stroudsburg, PA: Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Turney, P. D. (2006). Similarity of semantic relations. Compu­
tational Linguistics, 32, 379–416.

1033
Turney, P. D., & Pantel, P. (2010). From frequency to meaning:
Vector space models of semantics. Journal of Artificial
Intelligence Research, 37, 141–188.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional versus intuitive reasoning: The conjunction fallacy in probability
judgment. Psychological Review, 90, 293–315.
Van Dam, W. O., Rueschemeyer, S.-A., & Bekkering, H. (2010).
How specifically are action verbs represented in the neural
motor system: An fMRI study. NeuroImage, 53, 1318–1325.
Van Herten, M., Chwilla, D. J., & Kolk, H. H. (2006). When
heuristics clash with parsing routines: ERP evidence for
conflict monitoring in sentence perception. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 18, 1181–1197.
Van Tiel, B., Van Miltenburg, E., Zevakhina, N., & Geurts, B.
(2016). Scalar diversity. Journal of Semantics, 33, 137–175.
Wade-Stein, D., & Kintsch, E. (2004). Summary street:
Interactive computer support for writing. Cognition and
Instruction, 22, 333–362.
Westbury, C. (2016). Pay no attention to that man behind the
curtain. The Mental Lexicon, 11, 350–374.
Zannino, G. D., Caltagirone, C., & Carlesimo, G. A. (2015).
The contribution of neurodegenerative diseases to the
modelling of semantic memory: A new proposal and a
review of the literature. Neuropsychologia, 75, 274–290.
Zhila, A., Yih, W.-T., Meek, C., Zweig, G., & Mikolov, T.
(2013). Combining heterogeneous models for measuring
relational similarity. In L. Vanderwende, H. Daumé III, &
K. Kirchhoff (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2013 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies
(pp. 1000–1009). Stroudsburg, PA: Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Zwaan, R. A., & Madden, C. J. (2005). Embodies sentence comprehension. In D. Pecher & R. A. Zwaan (Eds.), Grounding
cognition: The role of action and perception in memory,
language, and thinking (pp. 224/245). Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.

