PAPERS ON SYNTAX

SYNTHESE LANGUAGE LIBRARY
TEXT AND STUDIES IN
LINGUISTICS AND PHILOSOPHY

Managing Editors
J A A K K 0 HI N T I K K A , Florida State University
ST ANLEY PETERS, The University of Texas at Austin

Editorial Board:
EMMON BACH, University of Massachusetts at Amherst
JOAN BRESNAN, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
JOHN LYONS, University of Sussex
JULIUS M.E. MORAVCSIK, Stariford University
PATRICK SUPPES, Stanford University
DANA SCOTT, Oxford University

VOLUME 14

ZELLIG S. HARRIS

PAPERS ON SYNTAX
Edited by Henry Hit

D. REIDEL PUBLISHING COMPANY
DORDRECHT : HOLLAND / BOSTON: U.S.A.
LONDON: ENGLAND

Library of CODgress Cataloging in PublicatioD nata

Harris, Zellig Sabbettai, 1909Papers on syntax.
(Synthese language library; v. 14)
Portions previously published as: Papers in structural
and transformational linguistics.
Includes bibliographical references and indexes.
I. Grammar, Comparative and general-Syntax-Addresses, essays, lectures. I. HiZ, Henry, 1917II. Harris, Zellig Sabbettai, 1909. Papers in
structural and transformational linguistics. III. Title.
IV. Series.
415
81-10690
P29l.H26
ISBN-13: 978-90-277-1267-7
e-ISBN-13: 978-94-009-8467-7
DOl: 10.1007/978-94-009-8467-7

Published by D. Reidel Publishing Compamy,
P.O. Box 17, 3300 AA Dordrecht, Holland
Sold and distributed in the U.S.A. and Canada
by Kluwer Boston Inc.,
190 Old Derby Street, Hingham, MA 02043, U.S.A.
In all other countries, sold and distributed
by Kluwer Academic Publishers Group,
P.O. Box 322, 3300 AH Dordrecht, Holland
D. Reidel Publishing Company is a member of the Kluwer Group.
This volume of the Synthese Language Library contains some new material and much of the
work published as Volume I of the Formal LinKuistics Series in 1970, under the title Papers in
Structural and Transformational Linguistics by Zellig Harris. Papers I through 12 are reprinted
from that volume, though 9, II, and 12 in excerpts, omitting mainly repetitious fragments.
Papers 13 through 16 were published in scientific journals after the publication of the Formal
Linguistics volume; they appear here with some deletions. The numbering of sections and
footnotes remains unchanged in abbreviated papers.

All Rights Reserved
Copyright © 1981 by D. Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht, Holland
Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1st edition 1981
No part of the material protected by this copyright may be reproduced or
utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording or by any informational storage and
retrieval system, without written permission from the copyright owner.

PREFACE

The selection of papers reprinted here traces the development of syntax from
structural linguistics through transformational linguistics to operator grammar. These three are not opposing views or independent assumptions about
language. Rather, they are successive stages of investigation into the wordcombinations which constitue the sentences of a language in contrast to
those which do not. Throughout, the goal has been to find the systematicities of these combinations, and then to obtain each sentence in a uniform
way from its parts.
In structural analysis, the parts were words (simple or complex, belonging
to particular classes) or particular sequences of these. In transformational
analysis, it is found that the parts of a sentence are elementary sentences,
whose parts in turn are simple words of particular classes. The relation
between these two analyses is seen in the existence of an intermediate stage
between the two, presented in paper 4, From Morpheme to Utterance. A
further intermediate stage is presented in the writer's String Analysis of
Sentence Structure, Papers on Formal Linguistics I, Mouton, The Hague
1962 (though it was developed after transformations, as a syntactic representation for computational analysis).
Generalization of both of these analyses leads to operator grammar, in
which each sentence is derived in a uniform way as a partial ordering of the
originally simple words which enter into it: Each step (least upper bound) of
the partial ordering (of a word requiring another) forms a sentence which is
a component of the sentence being analyzed.
There is an advance in generality as one proceeds through the successive
stages of analysis above. This does not mean increasingly abstract constructs; generality is not the same thing as abstraction. Rather, it means that
the relation of a sentence to its parts is stated, for all sentences, in terms of
fewer classes of parts and necessarily at the same time fewer ways ('rules') of
combining the parts, i.e. fewer constraints on free combinability (roughly,
on randomness). But at all stages the analysis of a sentence is in terms of its
relation to its parts - words and word sequences - without intervening
constructs. Because of this fact, and because the parts which are determined
are such that their meanings are preserved under the sentence-making operations, the meaning of a sentence as a particular combination of particular
v

vi

PREFACE

words is obtained directly as that combination of the meanings of those
words.
The greater generality in transformational analysis and especially in operator analysis, and the finding of component sentences within a sentence,
make it possible to characterize a sentence not only by how it decomposes
into parts but also by which defined subsets of the set of sentences contain
that sentence. With this, it becomes increasingly possible to formulate a
compact and relevant mathematical characterization of the structure and
subclassification of sentences, as is seen in the last papers in the present
volume.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PREFACE

V

STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS

1. Distributional Structure
2. Morpheme Alternants in Linguistic Analysis
3. Discontinuous Morphemes
4. From Morpheme to Utterance
5. Structural Restatements: I
6. Structural Restatements: II

3
23
36
45
71
89

TRANSFORMA TIONAL ANAL YSIS

7. Discourse Analysis
8. Co-occurrence and Transformation in Linguistic Structure
9. The Elementary Transformations
10. Transformational Theory
11. Decomposition Lattices

107
143
211
236
281

OPERATOR GRAMMAR

12. The Two Systems of Grammar: Report and Paraphrase
14. On a Theory of Language
15. Grammar on Mathematical Principles
16. Operator Grammar of English

293
352
377
392
412

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

437

INDEX OF SYMBOLS

477

13. A Theory of Language Structure

STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS

1

DISTRIBUTIONAL STRUCTURE

1. DOES LANGUAGE HAVE A DISTRIBUTIONAL STRUCTURE?

For the purposes of the present discussion, the term structure will be used in
the following non-rigorous sense: A set of phonemes or a set of data is
structured in respect to some feature, to the extent that we can form in terms
of that feature some organized system of statements which describes the
members of the set and their interrelations (at least up to some limit of
complexity). In this sense, language can be structured in respect to various
independent features. And whether it is structured (to more than a trivial
extent) in respect to, say, regular historical change, social intercourse,
meaning, or distribution - or to what extent it is structured in any of these
respects - is a matter decidable by investigation. Here we will discuss how
each language can be described in terms of a distributional structure, i.e. in
terms of the occurrence of parts (ultimately sounds) relative to other parts,
and how this description is complete without intrusion of other features such
as history or meaning. It goes without saying that other studies oflanguage historical, psychological, etc. - are also possible, both in relation to distributional structure and independently of it.
The distribution of an element will be understood as the sum of all its
environments. An environment of an element A is an existing array of its
co-occurrents, i.e. the other elements, each in a particular position, with which
A occurs to yield an utterance. A's co-occurrents in a particular position are
called its selection for that position.
1.1. Possibilities of Structure for the Distributional Facts

To see that there can be a distributional structure we note the following:
First, the parts of a language do not occur arbitrarily relative to each other:
each element occurs in certain positions relative to certain other elements.
The perennial man in the street believes that when he speaks he freely puts
together whatever elements have the meanings he intends; but he does so
only by choosing members of those classes that regularly occur together, and
in the order in which these classes occur.
Second, the restricted distribution of classes persists for all their occurWord 10, No. 2-3 (1954), 146-62.

3

4

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

rences; the restrictions are not disregarded arbitrarily, e.g. for semantic
needs. Some logicians, for example, have considered that an exact distributional description of natural languages is impossible because of their
inherent vagueness. This is not quite the case. All elements in a language can
be grouped into classes whose relative occurrence can be stated exactly.
However, for the occurrence of a particular member of one class relative to
a particular member of another class it would be necessary to speak in terms
of probability, based on the frequency of that occurrence in a sample.
Third, it is possible to state the occurrence of any element relative to any
other element, to the degree of exactness indicated above, so that distributional statements can cover all the material of a language, without
requiring support from other types of information. At various times it has
been thought that one could only state the normative rules of grammar (e.g.
because colloquial departures from these were irregular), or the rules for a
standard dialect but not for 'substandard' speech or slang; or that distributional statements had to be amplified by historical derivation (e.g.
because the earlier form of the language was somehow more regular).
However, in all dialects studied it has been possible to find elements having
regularities of occurrence; and while historical derivation can be studied
both independently and in relation to the distribution of elements 1, it is
always also possible to state the relative occurrence of elements without
reference to their history (Le. 'descriptively').
Fourth, the restrictions on relative occurrence of each element are described
most simply by a network of interrelated statements, certain of them being put
in terms of the results of certain others, rather than by a simple measurement
of the total restriction on each element separately. Some engineers and mathematicians (as also phoneticians and experimental psychologists) who have
become interested in language have sought a direct formulation of the total
restrictions on occurrence for each element, say for each sound. 2 This would
yield an expression for how the occurrences of each element depart from
equiprobability, and so would give a complete description of the occurrences
of elements in the language. Now it is of course possible to enumerate the
relative occurrences of a finite set of elements in finitely long utterances; but
direct enumeration is of little interest because it yields no simple description
of the over-all occurrences of elements, and because it does not order the
restrictions in such a way that the larger restrictions get stated before the
smaller ones. In contrast with this, it is possible to describe the occurrence
of each element indirectly, by successive groupings into sets, in such a way
that the total statements about the groupings of elements into sets and the
relative occurrence ofthe sets are fewer and simpler than the total statements
about the relative occurrence of each element directly.

DISTRIBUTIONAL STRUCTURE

5

We obtain then an ordered set of statements in terms of certain constructs
- the sets at successive levels. Since the ordering of statements can be
arranged so that the earlier ones will deal with the more inclusive sets, we
can stop the process of setting up these statements at any convenient point,
and accept the unfinished list of statements as an approximation to the
distributional facts - knowing that the subsequent statements will only make
subsidiary corrections to the earlier statements. (This is not the case for the
direct enumeration of restrictions, where the restrictions to be enumerated
after a given point may be greater than those enumerated before.)
In view of this we may say that there is not only a body of facts about the
relative occurrence of elements in a language, but also a structure of relative
occurrence (i.e. of distribution). Hence the investigation of a language entails
not only the empirical discovery of what are its irreducible elements and their
relative occurrence, but also the mathematical search for a simple set of
ordered statements that will express the empirical facts. 3 It may turn out that
several systems of statements are equally adequate, for example several
phonemic solutions for a particular language (or only, say, for the long
vowels of a language). It may also be that different systems are simpler under
different conditions. For example, one system may be adequate in terms of
successive segments of sound (with at most stress and tone abstracted), while
another system may be simpler if we admit the analysis of the sounds into
simultaneous components of varying lengths. Or one system of stating
distribution in respect to near neighbors (the usual environment for phonemic solutions) may be simple by itself, but if we are to imbed it in other
statements about farther neighbors we may find that when we choose a
modified system the statements covering the imbedding are simpler (i.e. a
different phonemic solution may be more convenient for use in statements
about morphemes). If the distributional structure is to be used as part of a
description of speech, of linguistic behavior, then we will of course accept
only such structures as retain a passably simple relation to the phonetic
features. But for some other purpose, such as transmission or systemic
analysis, phonetic complexity may be no serious objection. In any case, there
is no harm in all this non-uniqueness 4, since each system can be mapped onto
the others, so long as any special conditions are explicit and measurable.
Various questions are raised by the fact that there can be more than one
(non-trivial) structural statement for a given language. Can we say whether a
particular item of structural analysis contributes to the simplicity of the
system? It may be possible to do this: For example, if a given analysis
involves a particular classification of elements (say, verbs), we may try some
variation on this classification (say, by subdivision into transitive and
intransitive - distributionally defined) and see whether the resulting analysis

6

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

is simpler or not. Can we say what is invariant under all the possible distributional structures for a given body of data? For example, for all the
phonemic solutions in a given language, there remains constant the minimal
network of phonemically distinct utterance-pairs in terms of which we can
distinguish every phonemically distinct utterance.
The various structural systems considered here all have this in common,
that they list items and their occurrences. There is at least one other type of
structural statement which is essentially distributional but couched in
different terms. This is the style which describes one linguistic form as being
derived by some process (operation) from another. The item style says: Form
A includes elements e +f while form B includes elements e + g; and thus it
describes all forms as combinations of elements. The process style says:
Form A is derived from B by changingfinto g; and thus it describes most
forms as derived from certain base forms. The combinatorial or item style,
which has a more algebraic form, is more parsimonious and representative
for much of linguistic data. The process style, which is more similar to
historical statements, is useful in certain situations, especially in compact
morphophonemics. 5 Both styles are based solely on the relative occurrence
of parts, and are therefore distributional.
1.2. Reality of the Structure

Some question has been raised as to the reality of this structure. Does it
really exist, or is it just a mathematical creation of the investigator's?
Skirting the philosophical difficulties of this problem, we should in any case
realize that there are two quite different questions here.
One: Does the structure really exist in the language? The answer is yes, as
much as any scientific structure really obtains in the data which it describes:
the scientific structure states a network of relations, and these relations really
hold in the data investigated. 6
Two: Does the structure really exist in the speakers? Here we are faced
with a question of fact, which is not directly or fully investigated in the
process of determining the distributional structure. Clearly, certain behaviors
of the speakers indicate perception along the lines of the distributional
structure: for example, the fact that while people imitate non-linguistic or
foreign-language sounds, they 'repeat' utterances of their own language 7 (i.e.
they reproduce the utterance by substituting, for the sounds they heard, the
particular corresponding variants which they habitually pronounce; hence
the heard sounds are perceived as members of correspondence sets). There
are also evidences of perception of sounds in terms of their morphophonemic
memberships. 8
A reasonable expectation is that the distributional structure should exist in

DISTRIBUTIONAL STRUCTURE

7

the speakers in the sense of reflecting their speaking habits. 9 Indeed, responses
along the lines of distributional structure can be found in experimental
psychology work.1° However, different speakers differ in the details of
distributional perception. One speaker may associate the stem of nation with
that of native, while another may not: should the morpheme analysis be
different for the two idiolects (individual dialects)? Even if we take the
speaking habits to be some kind of social summation over the behaviors (and
habits) of all the individuals, we may not find it possible to discover all these
habits except by investigating the very speech events which we had hoped to
correlate with the (independently discovered) habits.
If, as Hockett proposes, we measure the habits by the new utterances
which had not been used in the structural description, we have indeed a
possible and sensible measure; and this applies both to real productivity
(the use of elements in environments in which they had not occurred before),
and also to arbitrarily unused data (utterances which may have occurred
before but which had not been used in deriving the distributional structure).
However, even when our structure can predict new utterances, we do not
know that it always reflects a previously existing neural association in the
speakers (different from the associations which do not, at a given time,
produce new utterances). For example, before the word analyticity came to
be used (in modern logic) our data on English may have contained analytic,
synthetic, periodic, periodicity, simplicity, etc. On this basis we would have
made some statement about the distributional relation of -ic to -ity, and the
new formation of analyticity may have conformed to this statement. But this
means only that the pattern or the habit existed in the speakers at the time of
the new formation, not necessarily before: the 'habit' - the readiness to
combine these elements productively - may have developed only when the
need arose, by association of words that were partially similar as to composition and environment.
For the position of the speakers is after all similar to that of the linguist.
They have heard (and used) a great many utterances among which they
perceive partial similarities: parts which occur in various combinations with
each other. They produce new combinations of these along the lines of the
ones they have heard. The formation of new utterances in the language is
therefore based on the distributional relations - as changeably perceived by
the speakers - among the parts of the previously heard utterances. l l
Concerning any habit, i.e. any predisposition to form new combinations
along particular distributional lines rather than others, we know about its
existence in the speakers only if we have some outside evidence (such as
association tests), or if new formations of the type in question have been
formed by these speakers. The frequency of slips, new formations, etc., is

8

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

enough to make us feel that the bulk of the major structural features are
indeed reflected in speaking habits - habits which are presumably based, like
the linguist's analysis, on the distributional facts. Aside from this, all we
know about any particular language habit is the probability that new formations will be along certain distributional lines rather than others, and this
is no more than testing the success of our distributional structure in predicting
new data or formations. The particular distributional structure which best
predicts new formations will be of greatest interest from many (not all) points
of view; but this is not the same as saying that all of that structure exists in
the speakers at any particular time prior to the new formations. 12
2. DISTRIBUTION AND MEANING
2.1. Is there a Parallel 'Meaning Structure'?

While the distinction between descriptive (synchronic) structure and historical change is by now well known, the distinction between distributional
structure and meaning is not yet always clear. Meaning is not a unique property
of language, but a general characteristic of human activity. It is true that
language has a special relation to meaning, both in the sense of the classification of aspects of experience, and in the sense of communication. But
the relation is not simple. For example, we can compare the structures of
languages with the structure of the physical w.orld (e.g. the kind of phenomena that are expressed by differentiation and integration in calculus), or
with what we know about the structure of human response (e.g. association,
transference). In either case, it would be clear that the structure of one language or another does not conform in many respects to the structure of
physical nature or of human response - i.e. to the structure of objective experience from which we presumably draw our meanings. And if we consider
the individual aspects of experience, the way a person's store of meanings
grows and changes through the years while his language remains fairly
constant, or the way a person can have an idea or a feeling which he cannot
readily express in the language available to him, we see that the structure of
language does not necessarily conform to the structure of subjective experience, of the subjective world of meanings. 13
All this is not to say that there is not a great interconnection between language and meaning, in whatever sense it may be possible to use this word. But
it is not a one-to-one relation between morphological structure and anything
else. There is not even a one-to-one relation between the vocabulary and any
independent classification of meaning: We cannot say that each morpheme
or word has a single or central meaning, or even that it has a continuous or
coherent range of meanings. Accidents of sound change, homonymity,

DISTRIBUTIONAL STRUCTURE

9

borrowing, forgotten metaphors, and the like can give diverse meanings to a
number of phonemic occurrences which we have to consider as occurrences
of the same morpheme. Aside from this, if we consider the suggestion of
Kurt Goldstein 14 that there are two separate uses and meanings of language - the concrete (e.g. by certain brain-injured patients) and the abstractit would follow that the same grammatical structure and much the same
vocabulary can carry quite different types of speaking activity.
The correlation between language and meaning is much greater when we
consider connected discourse. To the extent that formal (distributional)
structure can be discovered in discourse, it correlates in some way with the
substance of what is being said; this is especially evident in stylized scientific
discourse (e.g. reports on experimental work) and above all in the formal
discourses (proofs) of mathematics and logic. However, this is not the same
thing as saying that the distributional structure of language (phonology,
morphology, and at most a small amount of discourse structure) conforms in
some one-to-one way with some independently discoverable structure of
meaning. If one wishes to speak of language as existing in some sense on
two planes - of form and of meaning - we can at least say that the structures
of the two are not identical, though they will be found similar in various
respects.
2.2. Are Morphemes determined by Meaning?

Since there is no independently known structure of meanings which exactly
parallels linguistic structure, we cannot mix distributional investigations
with occasional assists from meaning whenever the going is hard. For example, if the morphemic composition of a word is not easily determined, we
cannot decide the matter by seeing what are the component meanings of the
word and assigning one morpheme to each: Do persist, person contain one
morpheme each or two? In terms of meaning it would be difficult to decide,
and the decision would not necessarily fit into any resulting structure. In
terms of distribution we have consist, resist, pertain, contain, retain, etc.
(related in phonemic composition and in sentence environment), but no such
set for person; hence we take persist as two morphemes, person as one.
Although rough indications of meaning are often used heuristically to
guess at the morphemes of a word or utterance, the decision as to morphemic
composition is always based on a check of what sections of that word or
utterance are substitutable in a structured (patterned) way in that environment; as roughly indicated in the example above.
Where the meanings (in most cases, the translations) are not immediately
suggestive, the analysis is laboriously distributional without any heuristic
aids to test. For example in the Cherokee verb prefixes, we find scores of

10

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

forms 15, e.g. /agwal.:)n!Jr:)gi/ 'I started', /sd:)gadhenoha/ 'I and another are
searching for you', /sd:)gadhenoh:)gi/ 'I searched for you two'. These have
obviously personal. reference, but it is impossible to separate out a small set
of phonemic segments which will mean 'I' or 'I as subject', 'I as object', etc.
It is nevertheless possible to discover the morphemes distributionally. First
we identify the words by their distributional relation to the rest of the
sentence. We find that certain words with many different stems and a few
different prefixes have certain types of environment in common. For example
/zin:)gali'a/ 'I am cleaning' and /agiyoseha/ 'I am hungry' occur in certain
environments in which /uniyoseha/ 'they are hungry' does not occur. We take
a set of words each with different stems but which have the same environment in the sense referred to above. We will assume that the sameness in this
feature of the environment correlates with some morphemic part that is the
same in all these words (and is obviously not the stem).16 This means that the
different prefixes of these words contain alternants of the same morpheme;
and we try to state a morphophonemic relation between /z/, /(a)g/, etc.,
giving the environing conditions (in phonemic rather than morphemic terms
if possible) in which each alternant occurs: we write the morpheme {z} and
translate it 'I'. Another set, containing e.g. /ozin:)galira/ 'I and others are
cleaning', /ogiyoseha/ 'I and others are hungry', would thus be analyzed
(in the same manner, but with the aid of {z}) as containing two morphemes,
{o} 'others' and {z} 'I'. If we now turn to the set containing /osdin:)galira/ 'I
and another are cleaning', /oginiyoseha/ 'I and another are hungry', etc.,
our morphophonemic knowledge about {z} enables us to separate out /d,/
/nl etc. as alternants of some third morpheme {n}, with undetermined
meaning. In /iginiyoseha/ 'you and I are hungry' our known morphophonemics enables us to analyze the prefix as an alternant of {z} plus an alternant
of this same {n}, where it seems to have the meaning 'you'. However, in
/hin;)galira/ 'you (sg.) are cleaning' we are unable to fit the /h/ into the
morphophonemic regularities of {n}, and thus set up a new morpheme {h}
'you'; and in /sdin;)galira/ 'you two are cleaning' we can satisfy the morphophonemic regularities by saying that there are two morphemes: the lsi
alternant of {h} plus the Idl alternant of {n}.
In this way we can divide each prefix into a unique combination of morphophonemic alternants of the following morphemes: {z} 'I', {h} 'you (sg.)',
{a} 'third person sg.', {i} 'plural' (always including 'you', at least due to
absence of {o}), {o} roughly 'person(s) excluding you', {n} roughly 'another
person, you as first choice'. These morphemes were obtained as solutions to
the environmental regularities of the prefixed phonemes. The translations
offered above are an attempt to assign a single meaning to each on the basis
of the meanings of all those words in which it occurs. If we write the prefixes

DISTRIBUTIONAL STRUCTURE

11

morphophonemically, then the meanings of some of the occurring combinations are: {ozn} (phonemically /osd/ etc.) 'I and he', {oz} 'I and they',
{zn} 'I and you (sg.)' {iz} 'I, you, and they', {h} 'you (sg.)', {hn} 'you two',
{in} 'you (pl.)'. From this we can try to extract (as above) a single meaning
contribution which {n} or {oJ or {i} bring to each combination in which
they are included. But it was not the isolation of these complicated central
meanings (if that is always non-trivially possible) that led us to recognize {n}
etc. as morphemes. We do not even know that these central meanings exist
for the speakers: the speakers may be subjectively using two homonymous
{n} morphemes, or they may be using these prefix combinations as fixed
whole entities with only a vague impression of the phonemic and morphophonemic regularities.17
So far, we have not touched the great majority of verb forms, those which
have objects together with the subjects. By using the morphophonemic
relations established previously, we are able to extract the morphemes above
from some of these new combinations, and small extensions of the morphophonemics reveal these morphemes in yet other combinations. Then we
analyze the prefix in /gaiha/ 'I am killing you' as {z}+ {n}, and in /sgwusadohda/ 'you covered me' as {h} + {z}; and certain order statements about
the two prefix components indicate the subject-object relation. The remaining
phonemes of some of these prefixes can be grouped by rather simple morphophonemics into a few additional morphemes like {g} 'animate object'; and
so we finally obtain a morphemic analysis of all the prefixes. This analysis
does not necessarily correlate with any meaning units we may have in mind
about person and number. For example, it gives the same morphemes {znn}
for the prefix in /sdagadhenoha/ 'I and another are searching for you
(whether sg. or dual but not plural)' and in /sdagadhenohagi/ 'I searched for
you two'. Even if we find different phonemes with different meanings, e.g.
/iza-gow'dihaj 'I and he see you (pl.)' and /izay-olighij 'I and they know you
(sg.)' the analysis may say that these are alternants of the same morphemic
composition {izn}; in that case both meanings can be obtained for each form.
The methods indicated so sketchily above suggest how the morphemic
composition of a word or utterance can be determined by the occurrence of
each phoneme sequence relative to others: e.g. per, con relative to sist, tain; or
/z/ /gi/, /0/, etc. rela~ive to various features of environment which are common
to /z/ and /gi/ as against /0/. The final decision as to morphemic analysis
always depends on this relative occurrence of phoneme sequences, since the
grammar then proceeds to state compactly the relative occurrence of the
morphemes. That is, we set up as morphemes those phonemic sequences (or
features) such that all utterances are compactly statable relative occurrences
of them.

12

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

The chief difficulty with this is that it provides us only with a criterion that
tells us whether a given phoneme sequence is a morpheme or not; more
exactly, whether a particular segmentation of an utterance (once we propose
it) divides it into morphemic segments. It does not provide us with a procedure which will directly yield a morphemic segmentation of an utterance.
There is available, however, a procedure which yields most if not all of the
morphemic segmentations of an utterance. In outline it is as follows: Given
any test utterance, associate many utterances whose first phoneme is the
same as that of the test utterance; and note how many different phonemes
follow the first in these utterances. Then consider utterances whose first two
phonemes are the same as the first two of the test utterance, and note how
many different phonemes follow the first two in these. And so on. If after the
first n phonemes the number of different phonemes which follow the nth (in
the associated utterances) is greater than the number after the first n-l
phonemes or the first n+ 1, then we place a tentative morpheme boundary
after the nth. Various operations are needed to correct and check the correctness of each result; but together with the final test of patterned relative
occurrence, this yields the morphemes of a language without any reference to
meaning or informant response.
2.3. Meaning as a Function of Distribution

Distribution suffices to determine the phonemes and morphemes, and to
state a grammar in terms of them. However, both (a) in determining the
elements and (b) in stating the relations between them, it turns out that the
distributional structure does not give ideal coverage. It must either leave
many details unsaid, or else become extremely complicated. For example: (a)
Morphemes are determined on the basis of a patterned independence
(replaceability in utterances) in respect to other morphemes (or phoneme
sequences); but not all morphemes have the same degree of independence:
compare hood (boyhood) with ness (bigness). (b) The grammatical statements
group morphemes into classes, and then say that certain sequences of these
classes occur; but not every member of the one class occurs (in any actual
body of data) with every member of the other: not every adjective occurs with
every noun. Finally we may mention one other respect in which distribution
fails to cover all the facts about speech occurrence: (c) We can state distributional regularities only within narrow domains - for phonology usually the
immediately neighboring phonemes, for morphology usually the sentence or
some part of the sentence.
At all these points where simple distributional regularities are no longer discoverable, people often revert to the position of our man in the street (§1.1)
and say that here the only determinant is meaning: (a) hood has a meaning

DISTRIBUTIONAL STRUCTURE

13

which ties it to certain few nouns; (b) with a given noun, e.g. doctor, there
will be used those adjectives that make sense with it; (c) beyond the sentence
there are no significant formal restrictions on what one says, and sentences
are strung along purely according to meaning. Now meaning is of course a
determinant in these and in other choices that we make when we speak. But
as we make these choices we build a stock of utterances each of which is a
particular combination of particular elements. And this stock of combinations of elements becomes a factor in the way later choices are made (in
the sense indicated in the last two paragraphs of §1.2); for language is not
merely a bag of words but a tool with particular properties which have been
fashioned in the course of its use. The linguist's work is precisely to discover
these properties, whether for descriptive analysis or for the synthesis of
quasi-linguistic systems. As Leonard Bloomfield pointed out, it frequently
happens that when we do not rest with the explanation that something is
due to meaning, we discover that it has a formal regularity or 'explanation'.
It may still be 'due to meaning' in one sense, but it accords with a distributional regularity.
If we investigate in this light the areas where there are no simple distributional regularities, we will often find interesting distributional relations,
relations which tell us something about the occurrence of elements and
which correlate with some aspect of meaning. In certain important cases it
will even prove possible to state certain aspects of meaning as functions of
measurable distributional relations.
(a) There are different degrees of independence (§3.3). We find complete
dependence in the various phonemes of one morpheme, or in the various
parts of a discontinuous morpheme (including grammatical agreement). In
hood we have sufficient independence to make it a separate morpheme, but
it is limited to very few predecessors. In ness there is more independence. The
degree of independence of a morpheme is a distributional measure of the
number of different morphemes with which it occurs, and of the degree to
which they are spread out over various classes or subclasses. The various
members of a distributional class or subclass have some element of meaning
in common, which is stronger the more distributional characteristics the
class has. The major classes have the kind of common meanings that are
associated, say, with the words 'noun' or 'adjective'.
(b) The fact that, for example, not every adjective occurs with every noun
can be used as a measure of meaning difference. For it is not merely that
different members of the one class have different selections of members of the
other class with which they are actually found. More than that: if we consider
words or morphemes A and B to be more different in meaning than A and C,
then we will often find that the distributions of A and B are more different

14

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

than the distributions of A and C. In other words, difference of meaning
correlates with difference of distribution.
If we consider oculist and eye-doctor 18 we find that, as our corpus of
actually occurring utterances grows, these two occur in almost the same
environments, except for such sentences as An oculist is just an eye-doctor
under afancier name, or I told him Burns was an oculist, but since he didn't
know the professional titles, he didn't realize that he could go to him to have his
eyes examined. Ifwe ask informants for any words that may occupy the same
place as oculist in sentences like the above (i.e. have these same environments), we will not in general obtain eye-doctor; but in almost any other
sentence we would. In contrast, there are many sentence environments in
which oculist occurs but lawyer does not: e.g. I've had my eyes examined by
the same oculist for twenty years, or Oculists often have their prescription
blanks printed/or them by opticians. It is not a question of whether the above
sentence with lawyer substituted is true or not; it might be true in some
situation. It is rather a question of the relative frequency of such environments with oculist and with lawyer, or of whether we will obtain lawyer here
if we ask an informant to substitute any words he wishes for oculist (not
asking what words have the same meaning). These and similar tests all
measure the probability of particular environments occurring with particular
elements, i.e. they measure the selections of each element.
It is impossible to obtain more than a rough approximation of the relatively
common selection of a given word (with almost no indication of its rarer
selection). But it is possible to measure how similar are the selection approximations of any two words (within various sets of data). If for two elements
A and B we obtain almost the same list of particular environments (selection),
except that the environment of A always contains some X which never
occurs in the environment of B, we say that A and B are (complementary)
alternants of each other: e.g. knife and knive-. If A and B have identical
environments throughout (in terms of our data tests) we say that they are free
variants: e.g. perhaps for /ek~namiks/ and /iyk~namiks/ economics. If the
environments of A are always different in some regular way from the
environments of B, we state some relation between A and B depending on
this regular type of difference: e.g. ain't and am not have frequent differences
of a certain type in their environments (ain't goin' but am not going) which
we would call dialectal. If A and B have almost identical environments
except chiefly for sentences which contain both, we say they are synonyms:
oculist and eye-doctor. If A and B have some environments in common and
some not (e.g. oculist and lawyer) we say that they have different meanings,
the amount of meaning difference corresponding roughly to the amount of
difference in their environments. (This latter amount would depend on the

DISTRIBUTIONAL STRUCTURE

15

numerical relation of different to same environments, with more weighting
being given to differences of selectional subclasses.) If A and B never have
the same environment, we say that they are members of two different
grammatical classes (this aside from homonymity and from any stated
position where both these classes can occur).
While much more has to be said in order to establish constructional
methods for such a classification as above, these remarks may suffice to
show how it is possible to use the detailed distributional facts about each
morpheme. Though we cannot list all the co-occurrents (selection) of a
particular morpheme, or define its meaning fully on the basis of these, we
can measure roughly the difference in selection between elements, say something about their difference in meaning, and also (above and §4.I) derive
certain structural information.
(c) If we investigate the relative occurrence of any part of one sentence in
respect to any part of the neighboring sentences in the same discourse, we
will find that there are certain regularities (§3.5 end). The sequence of
sentences is not entirely arbitrary; there are even certain elements (e.g.
pronouns) whose occurrence (and meaning) is specifically related to the
grammatically restricted occurrence of certain other morphemes in the
neighboring sentences (§4.1, first paragraph). Such regularities (and meanings) will not extend from one discourse to another (except to another
related in some relevant way to the first, e.g. successive lectures of a series).
A consecutive (or seriate) discourse of one or more persons is thus the fullest
environmental unit for distributional investigation. 19

3. DISTRIBUTIONAL ANALYSIS
We now review briefly the basic analysis applicable to distributional facts.

3.1. Element
The first distributional fact is that it is possible to divide (to segment) any
flow of speech into parts, in such a way that we can find some regularities in
the occurrence of one part relative to others in the flow of speech. These parts
are the discrete elements which have a certain distribution (set of relative
locations) in the flow of speech; and each bit of speech is a particular combination of elements. The first operation is purely segmenting, arbitrary if
need be. The first step of segmenting has to be independent of any particular
distributional criterion, since we cannot speak of distributional relations
until we have not only segments but also a similarity grouping of them (§3.2).
After the first segmenting of utterances, each segment is unique and has a
unique environment (completely different from every other one); after the

16

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

segments have been compared, and 'similar' ones grouped together, we find
that various of these similarity groupings have partially similar and partially
different environments. Hence we can speak about the distributional
relations of these similarity groupings.
If we wish to be able, in the later operations (§3.3-4), to obtain elements
(or classes of elements) whose distributions will have maximum regularity,
we have to divide not only the time flow into successive portions, but also
any single time segment (or succession of time segments) into simultaneous
components (of one segment length, e.g. a tone, or longer, e.g. a pitch-stress
contour). After we have set up the phonetically more obvious segmentations
and simultaneities, and have studied their distribution, we may find that
more regular distributions can be obtained if we change our original segmentation of elements, even to ones that are phonetically less obvious, and
even if some of our adjusted elements become components which extend
over various numbers of other elements.

3.2. Similarity
Another essential distributional fact is that some elements are similar to
others in terms of certain tests; or are similar in the sense that if we group
these similar elements into sets ('similarity groupings'), the distribution of all
members of a set (in respect to other sets) will be the same as far as we can
discover. This reduces ultimately to the similarity of sound segments under
repetition, or in the pair test: Xl is similar to X2 but not to Yl if, when one
native speaker repeats XlZ, X2Z, YIZ, .'" a second speaker can guess correctly
whether XIZ as against YlZ is being said, but not whether XlZ as against X 2Z is
being said. We call Xl and X2 free variants of each other (or members of a
similarity grouping). Note that the pair test involves discrimination of sound
but not of meaning.

3.3. Dependence (Serial)
To obtain a least set of elements sufficient for description we join any
elements which are completely dependent: if A is a set of similar elements (a
similarity grouping) and so is B, and (in a particular type of environment)
only AB occurs (not necessarily contiguously), never A or B alone, then we
set up AB as a single element (a single set of similar elements).
Thereafter we don't have any two elements which are completely dependent upon each other in occurrence. But our elements have various degrees
of dependence: for each element we can say that any utterance (or shorter
domain) which contains it will also contain such and such other classes. For
example, morpheme A may occur always close to (i.e. within a statable
distance from) anyone of a few or many Bl • B2 , .. , If the sequence BIA

DISTRIBUTIONAL STRUCTURE

17

occurs in environments X, it may be that Bl by itself also occurs in X (e.g.
kingdom and king), or that Bl does not (e.g. kingly and king). The Bl with
which A occurs may all have the same types of environment when they occur
without A (e.g. all predecessors of dom are nouns), or some may have one
type and some another (e.g. ish occurs with both nouns and adjectives).
These are a few of the various degrees and types of occurrence-dependence
which an element can have to the elements that occur in the same utterances
as it does.

3.4. Substitutability (Parallel)
It will in general appear that various elements have identical types of
occurrence-dependence. We group A and B into a substitution set whenever
A and B each have the same (or partially same) environments X (X being at
first elements, later substitution sets of elements) within a statable domain of
the flow of speech. This enables us to speak of the occurrence-dependence of
a whole set of elements in respect to other such sets of elements. Some of the
types of partial sameness of environment were listed in §2.3(b).
The elements of distributional structure are usually obtained by the
operations of §3.1, §3.2 and the first paragraph of §3.3. The distributional
relations are usually combinations of §3.3 and §3.4. For example, hood
occurs after few morphemes Nt> N 2 , ••• ofa certain substitution set ('nouns'),
ish after many of them, s and its alternants after all or almost all of them.
Ni + hood or Ni +s occur in the same large environments in which Ni occur
alone. But Ni + ish occur in different environments than Ni alone; however
ish also occurs after many members of another substitution set, At> A z , ...
('adjectives'), and both Ni + ish and Ai + ish occur in the larger environments
of Ai alone.

3.5. Domains
All the statements about dependence and substitutability apply within some
specified domain, the domain being determined either by nature (e.g. silence
before and after an utterance) or by the types of environment within which
there is regularity (e.g. the narrow restriction of hood is only to what precedes
it, and only to the first morpheme in that direction). It is often possible to
state the co-occurrences of elements within a domain in such a way that that
domain then becomes the element whose co-occurrences are regular within a
larger domain: e.g. the occurrences of stems and suffixes within word-length,
and of words within phrases. Common types of domain are the word, phrase,
clause. In many cases the stretches of speech covered by certain long pitch and
stress components (or fixed sequences of short pitch and stress components)
are identical with the domains of distributional relations: word, sentence.

18

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

Although grammar has generally stopped with the sentence, it is possible
to find distributional regularities in larger domains. There are certain sentence
sequences in which the second can be described as a fixed modification of the
first (e.g., with certain restrictions, in the case of questions and answers in
English). There are certain types of distributional relation (e.g. between
English active and passive, between buy and sell) which have particular
kinds of regularity in (not necessarily immediately) neighboring sentences.
For example, if one sentence contains noun A + active (transitive) verb
B+noun C, and a neighboring sentence contains C+verb+A, there is a
certain likelihood that the verb will be the passive of B; or if the neighboring
sentence contains C+the passive of B+some noun, there is a certain likelihood that the second noun will be A or some noun which elsewhere in that
discourse has similar individual environments (selection) to those of A. And
if one sentence contains A buys B from C, and a neighboring sentence
contains C sells B to + some noun, there is a good likelihood that the noun
will be A or an environmentally similar noun (and given C+some verb+B
to A, we may expect the verb to be sell or some environmentally similar
one).20
Finally, if we take a whole connected discourse as environment, we find
that there are certain substitution sets of morphemes which occur regularly
(relative to the other sets) throughout the discourse or some portion of it 21;
these are not the major substitution sets of the language (e.g. nouns) or its
grammatical subclasses, but new groupings which are often relevant only to
that one discourse. And there are certain sequences of these sets which
constitute the subdomains of the discourse, i.e. such that the sets are regular
within these intervals and the intervals are regular within the discourse; these
intervals are not necessarily sentences or clauses in the sense of grammatical
structure. The regularities in a discourse are far weaker and less interrelated
than those within a sentence; but they show that occurrence-dependence
(and the environment relevant for distribution) can extend throughout a
whole discourse.

3.6. Data
The distributional investigations sketched above are carried out by recording
utterances (as stretches of changing sound) and comparing them for partial
similarities. We do not ask a speaker whether his language contains certain
elements or whether they have certain dependences or substitutabilities.
Even though his 'speaking habits' (§1.2) yield regular utterances, they are not
sufficiently close to all the distributional details, nor is the speaker sufficiently
aware of them. Hence we cannot directly investigate the rules of 'the language' via some system of habits or some neurological machine that generates

DISTRIBUTIONAL STRUCTURE

19

all the utterances of the language. We have to investigate some actual corpus
of utterances, and derive therefrom such regularities as ','.'Quld have generated
these utterances - and would presumably generate other utterances of the
language than the ones in our corpus. Statements about distribution are
always made on the basis of a corpus of occurring utterances; one hopes that
these statements will also apply to other utterances which may occur naturally. Thus when we say that the selectional difference in oculist/lawyer is
greater than in oculist/eye-doctor (§2.3), or that the selection of nouns around
the passive verb is the same as the selection around the active verb but with
inverted order (§4.1), we mean that these relations will be approximated in
any sufficiently large corpus (especially one built with the aid of eliciting),
and that they will presumably apply to any sufficiently large additions to the
corpus.
In much linguistic work we require for comparison various utterances
which occur so infrequently that searching for them in an arbitrary corpus is
prohibitively laborious. To get around this, we can use various techniques of
eliciting, i.e. techniques which favor the appearance of utterances relevant to
the feature we are investigating (without influencing the speaker in any
manner that might bring out utterances which would not have sometimes
occurred naturally). In particular, investigations of the selections of particular
morphemes (§2.3, 4.1) can hardly be carried out without the aid of eliciting.
Eliciting is a method of testing whether a certain utterance (which is relevant
to our investigation) would occur naturally: in effect, we try to provide a
speaker with an environment in which he could say that utterance - if he ever
would naturally say it - without extracting it from him if he wouldn't. For
example, if we are testing the active/passive relation we might offer a
speaker noun Al + transitive verb BI and ask him to complete the sentence
in many ways, obtaining a particular selection CI , C z, ... after the verb.
Then we can offer a speaker the passive verb BI + Al and ask him to begin
the sentence in many ways, checking whether we get about the same selection
C b C z, ... before the verb. We can repeat this for various Ai' and then for
various Bi.
4. DISTRIBUTIONAL RELATIONS

The methods of §3 yield first of all a representation of each utterance as a
combination of elements. They also yield a set of statements about the
utterances: what elements and regularities of combination suffice to represent
the utterances. One can go beyond this and study the kinds of regularities,
and the kinds of relations among elements. As was pointed out at the end of
§2.3(b), certain correlations may be discovered even in those distributional
facts which are too individual to be directly useful.

20

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

4.1. As an example of the latter we may consider selectional similarity.

For instance, it is impossible to list all the verbs that follow each particular
noun, or all the verbs that follow who. But it is possible to state the following
relation between the verb selection of nouns and the verb selection of who:
Under an eliciting test as in §3.6, we will get after The pianist - much the
same verbs as we will get after The pianist who -, and so for every noun. This
meam that the verb selection of who is the same as the verb selection of the
noun preceding who. We have here a distributional characteristic that
distinguishes such pronominal elements from ordinary nouns.
Or we may consider the active/passive relation mentioned in §3.6. If we
take a large number of sentences containing a transitive verb in English, e.g.
The kids broke that window last week, we can elicit sentences consisting of the
same verb but with the passive morpheme, the same nouns before and after it
but in reverse order, and the same remainder of the sentence, e.g. That
window was broken by the kids last week. Some of these sentences may be
stylistically clumsy, so that they would not occur unless some special
circumlocution were involved; but they are obtainable by otherwise valid
eliciting techniques. 22 In contrast, if we seek such inversion without the
passive, we will fail to elicit many sentences: we can get The kids saw Mary
last week and Mary saw the kids last week; but to The kids saw the movie we
will never - or hardly ever - get The movie saw the kids (even though this
sentence is grammatical). Or if we seek such selectional similarity (with or
without inversion) for broke/will break or the like, we will find the same
selection as to preceding and following nouns, but not always as to the rest
of the sentence: The kids broke that window and The kids will break that
window, but not The kids will break that window last week or The kids broke
that window if they don't watch out. It thus appears that, using only distributional information about an ordinarily elicited corpus, we can find a
relation between the a.ctive verb and the passive verb which is different from
the relation between -ed and will.
4.2. The distributional regularities can themselves be a subject of study.
One can consider recurrent types of dependence and substitutabilities that
are found in a language (or in many languages), and find on one level such
relations as "subject" and "object" (semantic names for distributional
positions), and on a higher level of generality such relations as 'constituent'
and 'head of a construction' (if A occurs in environment X, and AB does too,
but B does not, then A is the head of AB). One can consider the parts of a
grammar which permit alternative distributional analyses, and check their
relation to language change and dialect or idiolect interrelations (since
probably every linguistic structure has some points which are structurally in

DISTRIBUTIONAL STRUCTURE

21

flux). One can investigate what are the structural characteristics of those
parts of a language which are productive. Furthermore, one can survey what
is similar and what is different in a great many language structures, and how
linguistic systems in general differ from such partially similar systems as
mathematics and logistic 'languages', sign languages, gestures, codes, music.
NOTES
The investigation of historical regularity without direct regard to descriptive (synchronic) structure was the major achievement of the linguists of the late eighteen hundreds.
There are incipient studies of historical-descriptive interrelations, as in H. M. Hoenigswald, 'Sound Change and LinguisticStructure', Lg. 22 (1946),138-43; cf. A. G. Juilland,
'A Bibliography of Diachronic Phonemics', Word 9 (1953), 198-208. The independent
study of descriptive structure was clarified largely by Ferdinand de Saussure's Cours de
linguistique generale, the Prague Circle in its Travaux du Cercle linguistique de Prague,
Edward Sapir in various writings, and Leonard Bloomfield's Language.
2 These approaches are discussed by Martin Joos, 'Description of Language Design',
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 22 (1950), 702-8, and W. F. Twaddell, ibid.
24 (1952), 607-11.
3 For a discussion of simplicity in this connection, see a forthcoming article by Noam
Chomsky, 'Some Comments on Simplicity and the Form of Grammars'.
4 Y. R. Chao, 'The Non-Uniqueness of Phonemic Solutions of Phonetic Systems', Bulletin of the Institute of History and Philology, Academia Sinica 4 (1934), 363-98. a. the two
solutions of Annamese phonemes in M. B. Emeneau, Studies in Vietnamese (Annamese)
Grammar, 9-22.
5 This kind of formulation is best expressed in the work of Sapir and Newman; cf. reviews of Selected Writings ofEdward Sapir (ed. by D. Mandelbaum) in Language 27 (1951),
289-92; and of Stanley Newman, Yokuts Language of California in International Journal
of American Linguistics 10 (1944), 196-211.
6 An opposition has sometimes been claimed between real facts and mathematical manipulation of structure. This claim ignores the fact that science is (among other things) a
process of indicating much data by few general statements, and that mathematical methods are often useful in achieving this. Mathematical and other methods of arranging data
are not a game but essential parts of the activity of science.
7 As pointed out by Kurt Goldstein, Language and Language Disturbances, 71,103.
8 E.g. in Edward Sapir, 'La realite psychologique des phonemes', Journal de Psychologie
Normale et Pathologique 30 (1933), 247-65 (translated in David Mandelbaum, ed., Selected
Writings of Edward Sapir, 46-60).
9 C. F. Hockett, review of Recherches structurales in International Journal of American
Linguistics 18 (1952), 98.
10 As pointed out to the writer by A. W. Holt.
11 This applies to the grammatical innovation involved in new formations; the selection
of morphemes within a class is determined, not only by these "grammatical" associations
but also semantically. Cf. the first paragraph of §1.1 above.
12 Here we have discussed whether the distributional structure exists in the speakers as a
parallel system of habits of speaking and of productivity. This is quite different from the
dubious suggestion made at various times that the categories of language determine the
speakers' categories of perception, a suggestion which may be a bit of occupational imperialism for linguistics, and which is not seriously testable as long as we have so little knowledge about people's categories of perception. Cf. for the suggestion, Benjamin L. Whorf,
'The Relation of Habitual Thought and Behavior to Language', Language, Culture and
Personality (Sapir Memorial Volume) (ed. by A. I. Hallowell, L. Spier, and S. Newman),
1

22

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

75-93; 'Languages and Logic', The Technology Review, 1941,43-6; and against it, Eric
H. Lenneberg, 'Cognition in Ethnolinguistics', Lg. 29 (1953), 463-71; Lewis S. Feuer,
'Sociological Aspects of the Relation Between Language and Philosophy', Philosophy of
Science 20 (1953), 85-100.
13 In E. G. Schachtel's 'On Memory and Childhood Amnesia', Psychiatry 10 (1947), 1-26
it is suggested that the experiences of infancy are not recallable in later life because the
selection of aspects of experience and the classification of experience embodied in language,
which fixes experience for recall, differs from the way events and observations are experienced (and categorized) by the infant.
14 Human Nature in the Light of Psychopathology: The William James Lectures for 193839, ch. 3.
15 The following analysis can be fully understood only if one checks through the actual
lists of Cherokee forms. The few forms cited here are taken from William D. Reyburn,
'Cherokee Verb Morphology II', International Journal of American Linguistics 19 (1953),
259-73. For the analysis, see the charts and comments in Reyburn's work and in Z. S.
Harris, 'Cherokee Skeletal Grammar', and 'Cherokee Grammatical Word Lists and
Utterances', in the Franz Boas Collection of the American Philosophical Society Library.
16 This assumption is based on the fact that each morpheme has a different distribution
(§2.36), so that same feature of environment points to the same morpheme.
17 Since new formations of these combinations do not appear, we cannot apply the productivity tests of §2.1 to discover the speakers' morphemic recognition.
IS This particular pair was suggested to me by Y. Bar-Hillel, who however considers that
distributional correlates of meaning differences cannot be established.
19 It should be clear that only after we discover what kinds of distributional regularities
there are among successive elements or sections in discourses can we attempt any organized
semantic interpretation of the successions discovered. Various types of discourses have
various types of succession (of sentences, clauses, or other intervals). In mathematics
and the constructed 'languages' of logic, certain conditions are imposed on what sentences
can appear in succession in their connected discourses (proofs): each sentence (line in a
proof) has to be a theorem or else derived from a preceding sentence in a particular way.
This situation does not hold for natural languages, where the truth-value of logic is not
kept constant through successive sentences, and where the types of succession are more
varied.
20 Such relations as that of active to passive, or buy to sell, are essentially substitutability relations (§3.4), i.e. they show that certain elements have similar environments (e.g.
partially inverted ones). The fact that they may appear in neighboring sentences is a serial
relation (§3.3) which is a secondary characteristic of certain substitutabilities. Relations
like that of active to passive are different from the essentially serial relations of successive
intervals of a discourse, discussed at the end of §3.5.
21 The fact that a discourse contains several or many occurrences of a given substitution
class, often in parallel positions, brings out a rare relation in linguistics: the order of occurrence of various members of the same class. Something like this comes up in compound
nouns, or in successions of two or more adjectives (sometimes with preferred order). Usually, if two members of a class occur in one domain, their order is not regular (e.g. in most
cases of Nand N); but in compound nouns, for instance, certain members are frequent in
the first N position, and others in the second.
22 There will be a few exceptions where the passive is not obtainable. And if we try to
elicit the active on the basis of the passive, we run into the difficulty of distinguishing between by of the passive (The letter was finished by Carl) and by as preposition (The letter
was finished by noon).

2

MORPHEME ALTERNANTS IN LINGUISTIC ANALYSIS

The purpose of this paper is to suggest a technique for determining the
morphemes of a language, as rigorous as the method used now for finding
its phonemes. The proposed technique differs only in details of arrangement
from the methods used by linguists today. However, these small differences
suffice to simplify the arrangement of grammars.
THE PRESENT TREATMENT OF MORPHEMES

1.0. In essence, the present treatment uses the following criterion: Every
sequence of phonemes which has meaning, and which is not composed of
smaller sequences having meaning, is a morpheme. 1 Different sequences of
phonemes constitute different morphemes; occurrences of the same sequence
with sufficiently different meanings constitute homonyms.
In some cases, this criterion dissociates certain morphemes which we wish,
because of the grammatical structure, to unite. Various methods are used at
present to get around this contradiction. In cases 1-3 below, different sequences of phonemes are considered as different forms of the same morpheme. In cases 4-5, sequences of phonemes are called not morphemes but
processes and the like. In case 6, a special relation is seen between different
morphemes.
1.1. Tiibatulabal 2 puw 'to irrigate', u'buw 'he irrigated' would have to be
analyzed as containing different morphemes, since the phoneme sequence
/puw/ does not occur in the second word. Similarly,pala'la'to arrive', a·bala·la
'he arrived'; for every morpheme which begins with a voiced stop after a
prefix there is a similar morpheme beginning with the homorganic voiceless
stop in word-initial. In spite of the phonemic difference between the members
of each of these pairs, we wish to consider each pair a single morpheme,
since in other cases we have a single morpheme in the position of both
members of these pairs: wa'Pin 'to pour', iJ'wiJ'Pin 'he poured'. We say that
there is a regular alternation in the language: a voiced stop is replaced by
the homorganic voiceless stop in word-initial.
Language 18, No.3 (1942), 169-80.

23

24

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

Similarly, Early Hebrew 3 had ro's 'head', ro'so' 'his head', but mawt
'death', mo·t6· 'his death'. Since unstressed /aw/ never occurs before a consonant, we say that it is regularly replaced by /0'/.
1.2. We would also have to say that there are different morphemes in
knife and knives. However, the connection between these is too obvious to
be disregarded in the grammar, and the difference occurs also in several
other pairs: wives, but strifes. We therefore create a morphophonemic
symbol, say /F/, which represents /v/ before /-z/ 'plural' and /f/ elsewhere,
and say that there is but one English morpheme /najF/. Or we give a morphophonemic formula: /f/ is replaced by /v/ before /-z/ 'plural' in the following
morphemes - knife, wife, ....
The use of morphophonemic statements or symbols is however of little
use in the next case, and of no use in case 4-6.
1.3. By the criterion of § 1.0, Heb. 'i'r 'city' and 'a'ri'm 'cities' contain
different morphemes. 4 Since the difference between 'i'r and 'a'r- is not found
between other morphemes with identical meanings, it seems awkward to
state it in a morphophonemic formula: /i/ is replaced by /a/ in 'i'r before
-i·m. Some linguists have called such pairs morpholexical alternants of one
morpheme. 5
1.4. In Greek ~tveo 'I remain', 1.u;~EVllICCL 'I have remained', AUeo 'I loose',
AEAOICCL 'I have loosed', the meaning of the reduplication is the same in all
cases, but the phonemic sequences vary so much that they are not commonly
considered to constitute a single morpheme. Instead, reduplication is often
called a morphological process, a special kind of affix, and the like.
1.5. Much the same is true of vowel changes which correlate with meaning
changes. They cannot be expressed by morphophonemic formulas, since
these formulas state the alternate forms of a single morpheme, whereas take
and took are not the same morpheme, having different meanings. Such vowel
changes are usually described as special kinds of morphological modification,
though they may alternate with additive suffixes like oed 'past time'.
1.6. There remain cases of morphemes which complement each other but
are entirely dissimilar in their phonemic sequences: am, are, is, be, etc. These
are considered different morphemes, but with a special mutual relation of
suppletion.
PROPOSED TREATMENT OF MORPHEMES

2.0. It is proposed here to arrange the morphemes of a language more
clearly by carrying out rigorously three linguistic procedures, the first and
third of which are in common use today.
2.1. We divide each expression in the given language into the smallest
sequences of phonemes which have what we consider the same meaning

MORPHEME ALTERNANTS IN LINGUISTIC ANALYSIS

25

when they occur in other expressions, or which are left over when all other
parts of the expression have been divided off. This is identical with the
criterion of § 1.0. The resultant minimum parts we call not morphemes, but
MORPHEME ALTERNANTS.

It is useful to generalize this definition of morpheme alternant by taking
sequence to mean not only additive sequence (the addition of phonemes),
but also zero (the addition of no phonemes), negative sequence (the dropping
of a phoneme), and phonemic component sequence (the addition of a physiological feature of phonemes). In He cut it there is a zero morpheme meaning
'past time' after cut. In Hidatsa, we have a minus morpheme, consisting of
dropping the final vowel mora, with the meaning of command 6: cixic 'he
jumped', cix 'jump!', ika·c 'he looked', ika 'look!'. In took we have two
morphemes: take, and lejl - luI 'past time'. The latter occurs also in shook
as compared with shake. It is a combination of negative and additive sequences: dropping /ejl and adding lu/. Another negative-additive morpheme
is la/-/el 'plural', which occurs in men as compared with man. Lastly, we
have a phonemic component morpheme in to believe, to house, etc., if we
wish to divide these words into belief, house, etc. plus a morpheme consisting
of voicing the final consonant and having the grammatical meaning 'verb'.
As in the case of ordinary additive morphemes, zero and the others can
be recognized only by comparison with other morphemes. Thus in deciding
whether to recognize a minus morpheme in Hidatsa we are faced with the
following choice: Consider cixic, ika·c, also kikuac 'he set a trap', kiku 'set
a trap!'. If we call cix, ika, kiku single morphemes (functioning both as
stems and as command), then the morphemes meaning '(he) did' would be
ic, ·C, ac, etc. We would have no way of indicating which of these forms
occurs after each stem except by listing all the stems. Linguistic procedure
chooses the simpler arrangement: it considers the stems to be cixi, ika·,
kikua, and the suffix always -c. Then the command forms must be analyzed
as having two morphemes, the stem plus the dropping of the last mora.'
Note that at this stage of the analysis every element, here called morpheme
alternant, has only one sequence of phonemes: knife and knive- are two
separate morpheme alternants.
2.2. From the list of morpheme alternants which results from the preceding step, we take any two or more alternants which have what we consider
the same meaning (but different phonemes) and no one of which ever occurs
in the same environment as the others.8 The two or more alternants which
meet these conditions are grouped together into a single MORPHEME UNIT: am,
which occurs only in phrases with I, and are, which never occurs with I, are
put into one morpheme unit. In many cases when we take one alternant and
try to find another to group with it, we fail: e.g. in the case of walk, rain. In

26

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

such cases we say that the single alternant constitutes a morpheme unit by
itself. A morpheme unit is thus a group of one or more alternants which
have the same meaning and complementary distribution. To make these
units more similar to our present morphemes, and more serviceable for
grammatical structure, we now add a further condition: In units consisting
of more than one alternant, the total distribution of all the alternants (i.e.
the combined range of environments in which each of them occurs) must
equal the range of environments in which some unit with but a single alternant occurs. Thus the combined environments of am, are, be are included
in the environments in which walk occurs: I am, they are, to be, as compared
with I walk, they walk, to walk. The case is different with twenty and score,
even though they have the same meaning and never occur in the same environment. 9 For there is no morpheme unit in English which consists of only
one alternant and which occurs in the combined distribution of twenty and
score. Therefore, we consider the alternants am, are, be as being members of
a single morpheme unit; but of the alternants twenty and score, each constitutes a morpheme unit by itself.
A few examples of alternants which can be grouped together into units:
knife and knive-: knive- occurs only before /-z/ 'plural', knife never does; the
sum of the positions in which both occur equals the range of positions in
which the single alternant Jork occurs.
go and wen-: wen- only before -t 'past', go never; walk occurs in both
positions.
/-"zl (only after alternants ending in Is, s, c, z, z, j/ but not after all of
these), I-sf (only after alternants ending in the other voiceless phonemes),
/-z/ (only after alternants ending in the other voiced phonemes), /-"n/ (after
ox), zero (after sheep), la/ "" le/ (with man), etc., meaning 'plural'; the total
range of environments equals that of zero 'singular', the suffix -Jul, and other
single-alternant morpheme units.
/-"z, -s, -z/ (all these in the same environments as above), zero (only after
the /-"z, -s, -z/ alternants of 'plural'), and no more, all meaning 'possessed
by' or the like.
j-"d, -t, -d/, zero (after cut), /ejj "" lui (with take, etc.), and several other
alternants, 'past'; no two of these occur after the same alternant, and the
combined environments in which they all occur equals the distribution of
-s '3d sg. pres.'.
One might ask why it is necessary to perform this step formally, instead
of merely recognizing that various suffixes (e.g. -ed) have occasional variant
(suppletive) forms like vowel change (e.g. lejj "" ju/), or that reduplication is
an affix having special phonemic similarity to its stem. The drawback in the
latter method is that it tells both the special form and the morphological

MORPHEME ALTERNANTS IN LINGUISTIC ANALYSIS

27

status of the affixes at the same time. This makes it difficult to treat these
two features separately, to discuss the special forms together with the special
forms of other suffixes and stems (i.e. with the other groupings of alternants),
and to discuss the morphological status on the same plane as the morphological status of affixes which do not have special forms. In the proposed
method, reduplication is described as a group of morpheme alternants,
grouped into a unit, between whose members a particular kind of difference
exists; the status of these alternants in the morphology is irrelevant here and
would be discussed in the section dealing with the relations between morpheme units.
2.3. We now have a list of morpheme units. We take each unit which
consists of more than one alternant, and note the difference between its
alternants. If we find another morpheme unit having an identical difference
between its alternants, we can describe both units together. Thus the difference between knife and knive-, which make up one unit, is identical with the
difference between wife and wive-, which make up another, and with the
difference between lea/and leave-, and so on. Instead of listing both members
of each unit, we now list only one representative of each unit with a general
statement of the difference which applies to all of them: Each of the units
knife, wife, ... , has an alternant with Ivl instead of IfI before I-zl 'plural'.
In cases like this we can readily see that the units in question have identical
relations between their alternants. In other cases it is far more difficult to see
that the differences between alternants is identical in various units. For
example, in Tiibatulabal there are many units whose alternants differ in
length of vowel: ya'ya1J 'to be timid', after the reduplication morpheme
(which means 'past time') -yaya1J; ta'wak 'to see', after reduplication- dawa'g-;
but pala·la 'to arrive', after reduplication -bala·la; the reduplication vowel,
too, is short before some morphemes, long before others. Swadesh and
Voegelin 10 showed that a general statement can be made for all these differences in vowel length. They first investigated each morpheme unit to see
whether any of its vowels had basic length or basic shortness. A vowel is
here said to have basic length if it is long in all the alternants of the unit 11 :
e.g. the second M in pala·la. A vowel has basic shortness if it is short in all
the alternants of the unit 12: e.g. the second lal in ya·ya1J. Vowels which do
not have basic length or shortness may be called neutral. Then the general
statement is: In every morpheme alternant, counting from the beginning of
the word, every odd-numbered vowel which is neutral is long, and every
even-numbered vowel which is neutral is short. 13 The length of the neutral
vowels in each alternant of any particular unit is therefore determined by
the number of vowels which precede the alternant within the same word: in
ta'wak the first neutral vowel of the morpheme is the first vowel of the word,

28

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

and therefore long; in ao-dawaog- the same first neutral vowel of the morpheme is the second vowel of the word, hence short. As a result of this
general statement, it is no longer necessary to list the alternants which differ
in vowel length. 14 We merely indicate which vowels of each unit have basic
length or shortness.
In the case of some morpheme units, the difference between the alternants
is expressed in two or more general statements: e.g. the difference in consonants between ta'wak and -dawa·g- is expressed in the statement that all
morphemes with voiced stops have alternants with voiceless stop when the
stop is at word boundary, while the difference in vowel length was expressed
above.
THE RESULTANT ANALYSIS

3.0. We can now describe the six cases of § 1.1-6 as being all particular
instances of one general operation.
3.1. The Tiib. alternants puw and -buw, both 'irrigate', are grouped together into one morpheme unit. For the first alternant occurs only at word
initial, the second never; and the total range of positions in which both
occur equals that of the single-alternant unit hU'da 'to be up (sun)'. Similarly,
Heb. mawt and mo·t-', both 'death', are grouped into one unit (compare
rlH and ro·s-' 'head').
3.2. knife and knive- satisfy the condition for composing one unit.
3.3. Heb. 'ior and 'a'r- 'city' are grouped into one unit: 'a'r- occurs only
before -i'm 'plural', 'i'r never; the combined positions of both equal the
positions in which su's 'horse' occurs.
3.4. Greek J.LB, A.B, and other reduplication prefixes, meaning 'perfect aspect', are alternants of one morpheme unit: J.L& occurs only before morphemes
beginning with /m/, A.B only before those beginning with /1/, and so on (with
other alternants before special types of morphemes); the combined range of
environments of all these alternants equals the range of the B- verb prefix
(augment). A similar case is that of the echo words in languages of India.
Thus, in Kota 15, puj is 'tiger', puJ-fJi] is 'any tiger'; kalr.z is 'thief', kalr.z-fJi/r.z
is 'some thief'. 'Ii], fJilr.z, and the other echo words have the same meaning;
'Ii] occurs only after morphemes of the form CVj, fJilr.z only after morphemes
of the form CYll}., and so on. The combined range of positions of all these
echo words beginning with 'Ii is equal to the range of any single alternant
which occurs as second member in compounds and which (unlike the echo
words) is not restricted to particular first members. We therefore group all
these echo words into one morpheme unit with the meaning 'any, some, and
the like', and say that the general form of the unit is fjiX, where X is whatever follows the initial CV of the first member of the compound.

MORPHEME ALTERNANTS IN LINGUISTIC ANALYSIS

29

3.5. The form took is divided into take plus lej/ '" /u/; /ej/ '" lui is an
altern ant which is grouped with /d/ and other alternants into a morpheme
unit meaning 'past time', since they all satisfy the conditions for such
grouping.
3.6. The forms am, are, be, i- (before /z/ '3d sg. pres.'), -as, -ere (both after
w-, which is an alternant grouped with /d/ 'past time') are all grouped into
one morpheme unit.
4.0. It is not enough to show that all such relations between alternants are
special cases of one relation, namely that between the alternants of one
morpheme unit. For there are differences between these cases, and we must
see if it is possible to arrange these differences systematically as subdivisions
of the operation of grouping alternants into units. It appears that we can
record these differences in a simple manner if each time we group alternants
into one unit we answer four questions: (1) What is the difference between
the alternants of this unit? (2) In what environments does each altern ant
occur? (3) What similarity is there, if any, between the aIternant and the
environment? (4) What morpheme units have this difference between their
alternants?
4.1. The Difference between the Alternants. In some morpheme units the
alternants are the same except for one or two phonemes: e.g. the cases in
§ 3.1-3. In other units there are many alternants, all (or most) having some
phonemic structure in common: e.g. the reduplication alternants in § 3.4
have the form Ceo In both cases we say that the alternants differ in only part
of their phonemic sequence. In other units, however, such as in § 3.5-6, the
alternants differ entirely.
4.2. The Environment in which each Alternant occurs. When a morpheme
unit occurs in a given context, the alternant which appears there is determined
by the environment of neighboring alternants. Each alternant of that unit
occurs only in the neighborhood of particular other alternants; and often,
if we investigate each of the morphemes in whose neighborhood the given
altern ant occurs, we will find that there is a common feature to all of
them.
However, we will find that it is not enough to say that there is a common
feature to all the environments in which a particular alternant occurs. It is
not enough to say that all the environments in which /-';}z/ 'plural' occurs
have a common feature, namely that they all end in a sibilant or affricate.
For while it is true that every time we have /-';}z/ we find before it a morpheme
ending in Is, s, c, z, z, j/, e.g.jox,joxes, the statement seems to be false when
we consider ox, oxen. Since ox ends in Is/ we might have expected the /-';}z/
alternant to occur after it. The catch lies in this: that every time /-'dz/ occurs

30

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

it has a morpheme ending in a sibilant or affricate before it, but not every
morpheme ending in a sibilant or affricate has the /-~z/ altemant after it.
After we have counted all the morphemes before I-~z/ - and all of them end
in Is, s, c, z, Z, 11 - we have left over one or two morphemes which end in
sibilants without having /-~zl after them. We therefore say that /-~z/ occurs
only after morphemes ending in Is, s, c, z, z,11 but not after all of them. The
case is different with the Hebrew altemant mawt. This altemant occurs only
with main stress; that is, whenever we find mawt, we find the stress on it.
The other altemant, mo·t, occurs only before the stress. Here we can tum
the statement around, as we could not in the case of I-~z/. We can say that
whenever the stress is on the unit mawt, the altemant which appears is mawt,
and whenever the environment is stressed after the unit, the altemant which
appears is mo·t. Mter we have counted all the unstressed occurrences, where
the altemant is mo·t, we have no unstressed occurrences left over where the
altemant is something else. We therefore say that mo·t occurs only in unstressed environments and in all unstressed environments. The difference
between these two cases is seen again in the Menomini e 16 , which is an
altemant of the morpheme juncture I-I. In most cases, when a Menomini
morpheme follows another within one word, there is no extra sound between
them, and we may mark the junction between them with a hyphen. However,
every time the first morpheme ends in C and the second begins in C, we find
an e between the two morphemes, appearing, we might say, in place of the
hyphen. This e also occurs between certain morphemes ending in V and
certain ones beginning in /w/. As in the cases of I-~zl and mo·t, we must
distinguish the two environments: the first is any morphemes ending and
beginning in C; the second is certain particular morphemes ending in V and
beginning in Iw/. Hence we say that the altemant e for I-I (morpheme
juncture) occurs in all environments of the form ... C-C ... , and in certain
environments of the form ... V-w ....
A special case of environments which consist of a phonemic feature is that
of junctures (boundaries of words, etc.). Some altemants occur only at word
boundary and at any word boundary: e.g. Tub. ta'wak as compared with
-dawa·g-.17
In some morpheme units, what is common to all the environments in
which a particular altemant occurs is the presence of a morpheme from a
particular grammatical class. Thus, the contraction which occurs in Menomini 18 between certain morphemes ending in Vw and others beginning in
Is/, occurs between all such morphemes if the first is a verb stem and the
second an inflectional suffix.
In other units, a given altemant appears only next to particular morpheme
units (knive- only before I-zi 'plural', am only with I), or only next to par-

MORPHEME ALTERNANTS IN LINGUISTIC ANALYSIS

31

ticular morpheme alternants (zero alternant of 'possessed by' only after the
I-s, -z, -ezl alternants of 'plural').
A special problem of morpheme division may be mentioned here. In some
cases, not only does a morpheme unit have a unique alternant which occurs
only when it is next to a particular second unit, but the second unit also has
a unique alternant when it adjoins the first; e.g. children, if it is divided into
leild/, alternant of leajldl only before -ren, and-ren, alternantof I-zi 'plural' only
after child. Such situations often result from vowel contraction; e.g. Menomini morpheme units ending in 18/ 19 have alternants with Iyl (instead of lei)
before morpheme units beginning with 101; and units beginning with 101 have
alternants with lal (instead of 10/) after units ending in lsI: instead of having
the sequence 1... i-o ...1we have 1... y-a ... I. Each morpheme functions as the
environment which determines the alternant of the other. In such cases it is
sometimes hard to decide where to put the division between the two alternants. Thus children could alternatively be divided into leildrl and -en; from
the point of view of grammatical arrangement each of the two points of
division has advantages and disadvantages. In another Menomini contraction 20, the sequence of certain morpheme units ending in lawl followed by
certain other units beginning in ItI has not 1... aw-t ...1 but /. .. 0 ...1. We
could say that the unit ending in lawl had an alternant ending in 10/, and
the one beginning in ItI had an alternant without the It/; or we could divide
differently. The choice is immaterial here, and can be decided only by seeing
which division would be more similar to the division of other morpheme
sequences.
4.3. Similarity between the Alternant and its Environment. In many morpheme units there is no recognizable similarity between the alternants and
the environments in which they occur; e.g. between am and I, between i(alternant of am) and I-zl '3d sg. pres.', between lej/'" lui and take. In some
cases, however, there is identity in phonemic feature (partial assimilation) or
in phonemes (repetition or total assimilation); e.g. I-sl 'plural' occurs only
after alternants ending in voiceless phonemes and is identically voiceless
with the phoneme preceding it, while the voiced alternant I-zl occurs only
after voiced phonemes. Identity in whole phonemes is rarer: the consonant
of the Greek reduplication, and the X of the Kota r;iX.
4.4. Morpheme Units in which the Difference occurs. Some differences between the alternants of a morpheme unit occur in all the units of that
language which have the particular phoneme involved in the difference; e.g.
the difference between alternants with voiced and with voiceless stops occurs
in all Tiibatulabal units, if they but have a voiced stop at either end. Other
differences occur in many units, but not in all; e.g. the difference between
alternants ending in IfI and in Ivl occurs in wife, life, etc., but not in fife.

32

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

Still other differences appear only in one unit; e.g. the differences between
the alternants in § 3.3, 6.
5.0. To sum up: The difference between alternants of a unit may be partial
or complete. It may occur in all units which have a stated feature (e.g. a
given phoneme in a certain position), or in some units having a stated
feature in common, or in a unique unit (or in several units which have no
stated feature in common). The range of environments which determine the
appearance of the alternant in question may consist of all morphemes which
have a stated feature, or of only some of the morphemes having that feature,
or of a unique morpheme (or of several morphemes having no common
feature).
It now becomes a simple matter to recognize wherein one grouping of
alternants into a unit differs from another (see § 4.0).
5.1. If the difference between alternants of a unit is complete, it necessarily
applies only to one unit. 21 If the difference is partial, it may occur in one,
some, or all units which have a stated feature.
5.2. If there is a phonemic or morphologic feature which is present only
in the units in which the difference under discussion occurs (and in no other
units), then we may name the feature in a general statement and there is no
need to list the units in which the difference occurs: all Hebrew morphemes
with lawl had alternants with 10'/. On the other hand, if there is a feature
which is common to all the units in which the difference under discussion
occurs, but which is also present in other units (in which this difference does
not occur), then we may either list all the units, or else make a mark upon
their common feature to distinguish these units from the other units in which
the difference does not occur: see knife in § 5.4.
But if the unit in which the difference occurs is unique, or if there are
several units which have no common feature, then we must list all of them.
5.3. The method of describing the environment in which an alternant
occurs is similar to the method of describing the units in which the difference
occurs.
If whenever a certain feature is present in the environment only a given
alternant (and no other one of its own unit) occurs i.e., if the given alternant
is the only one of its unit to occur when that feature is present in the environment, then we name the feature in a general statement and there is no
need to list all the environments in which the given alternant occurs: Hebrew
units with lawl always had alternants with 10'1 when the unit was unstressed.
Similarly, if a certain feature is always present in the environment when a
given alternant appears, but if some other alternants of the same unit also
have that feature in their environment, then we may either list all the specific

MORPHEME ALTERNANTS IN LINGUISTIC ANALYSIS

33

environments in which the given alternant appears, or else mark these environments to distinguish them from other environments which have the
same feature: lejl '" luI alternant of -ed 'past time' appears only with morphemes having the structure CejC, but not all morphemes CejC are followed
by the lejl '" luI alternant, since rake and other morphemes of this structure
are followed by the -ed alternant.
If the environment in which the alternant occurs is unique, or if there are
several environment morphemes which have no common feature, then we
must list all of them.
5.4. A few examples:
Early Hebrew: All units having lawl have alternants with 10'1 instead,
when any stressed morpheme follows within the word. (Both the units and
the environments to which this applies include all those which have the
features stated here.)
Menomini 22: Some units ending in Inl have alternants ending in lsi instead,
before all morphemes beginning with leI. (The units involved here are only
some of those having the stated feature In/. Therefore they must be listed or
marked. Bloomfield writes the units which do not have the /s/ alternant with
N, and those which have the /s/ alternant with n, thus distinguishing the two
groups.)
Kota: The unit for 'any, some, and the like' has alternants of the form9iX
after any morpheme CVX. (The unit is unique; the environment is any unit
having the stated feature.)
English: Some units ending in IfI have alternants ending in /vl instead,
before /-zl 'plural'. (We may write all these units with F: /najF/, but /fajf/.
The environment, being unique, need not be specially marked.)
The unit leajldl has the alternant leiIdl before -ren 'plural'.
The unit -ed 'past time' has the alternant lejl '" /ul with some units of the
form CejC. (Note that here it is the environmental morphemes that have to
be listed or marked.)
The unit /-zl 'plural' has the alternant I-s/ after most morphemes which
end in a voiceless phoneme, and in no other environments. (The unit is
unique. The environments have to be listed or marked. However, since the
cases where an alternant other than I-sf occurs after the stated feature are
relatively rare, it is simpler to list the cases where I-s/ does not occur. They
may be listed in connection with the alternants with which they occur; i.e.
we list the alternants of 'plural': I-~zl after Is, s, ... /, -en after ox, ... , I-si
after the other morphemes ending in a voiceless phoneme.)
5.5. Statements made for unique alternants are best included in the dictionary rather than the grammar. Units referred to in general statements are
written with one base form representing all the alternants and containing any

34

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

special marks which the general statement may require. By applying to the
base form all the general statements which refer to it we obtain the alternants
which occur in the environments named in the general statements.
CONCLUSION

Possible advantages of the method described here are:
6.1. It prescribes three explicit procedures which, if rigorously followed,
will lead to a unique 23 arrangement of the phenomena described here for a
particular language.
6.2. It presents regular phonology, morphophonemics, sandhi, morphological processes like vowel change, morpholexical variation, suppletion, and
the like as cases of a single linguistic relation, described in § 2.2. The differences between these cases are systematized in §§ 4 and 5.
6.3. It leaves not merely less, but a simpler morphology. This is necessarily
so, because the procedure of § 2.2 (especially the condition concerning the
total range of environment) removes from consideration as a separate morpheme unit any alternant which has a more specialized distribution than the
rest of its class and which is complementary to other over-specialized alternants. The morphology describes the relations between morpheme units, all
those in a given class now having roughly the same distribution.
6.4. It simplifies our general picture of linguistic structure, i.e. of what
relations can be discovered between the elements of linguistic expressions.
For it shows that we can arrange alternants into units in exactly the same
manner as we arrange sound types (positional variants) into phonemes.
7.1. Summary. The method of arranging the morphemes of a language
consists of three steps: (1) dividing each phonemically written linguistic expression into the smallest parts which recur with the same meaning in different expressions, each such part to be called a morpheme alternant; (2)
grouping into a distinct morpheme unit all alternants which satisfy the
following conditions: (a) have the same meaning (b) never occur in identical
environments, and (c) have combined environments no greater than the environments of some single alternant in the language; (3) making general
statements for all units which have identical difference between their alternants.
7.2. Every statement, general or particular, about the alternants must
contain three pieces of information: (a) what is the difference between the
alternants; (b) in what environments does each altern ant occur; (c) in what
units does the difference occur. It is seen that various groupings of alternants
into units differ on these three counts.

MORPHEME ALTERNANTS IN LINGUISTIC ANALYSIS

35

NOTES
1 L. Bloomfield, Language, New York 1933, 161.
2

4.

M. Swadesh and C. F. Voegelin, 'A Problem in Phonological Alternation', Lg. 15 (1939),

Z. S. Harris, 'Linguistic Structure of Hebrew', lAOS 61 (1941), ISS.
Ibid., 159.
S L. Bloomfield, 'Menomini Morphophonemics', TCLP 8 (1939),105.
6 R. H. Lowie, Z. S. Harris, and C. F. Voegelin, Hidatsa Texts (Indiana Historical Society
Prehistory Research Series 1), 1939, 192, fn. 38.
? Cf. Bloomfield, Language, 217, where it is shown that the relation between masculine
and feminine adjectives in French can be most simply described by regarding the feminine
forms as basic.
8 This excludes synonyms, i.e. morphemes of approximately similar meaning, which
usually occur in the same positions: aline youngster, aline lad.
S As in a score oJ voices, but twenty voices. However, we may consider that twenty occurs
in the same position as score in a twenty 'a $20 bill'.
10 Lg. 15 (1939), 5ff. The formulation presented here is a restatement, in terms of morpheme alternants, of their morphophonemic analysis.
11 Or if it is always short while each of its neighboring vowels is either always long or
always short.
12 Unless it is next to a basically long vowel, in which position even a neutral vowel is
always short.
13 But a neutral vowel next to one with basic length is always short.
14 Certain additional general statements involving I?I, etc., must be applied before the
statement about vowel length.
15 M. B. Emeneau, 'An Echo-Word Motif in Dravidian Folk Tales', lAOS 58 (1938),
553-70; 'Echo Words in Toda', New Indian Antiquary 1 (1938), 109-17.
16 Bloomfield, TCLP 8, 105-15, no. 10-2.
11 What is called external sandhi, therefore, differs from internal sandhi merely in that the
former contains statements which have word juncture as a necessary part of their determining environments, while the latter does not. In some languages, alternants next to
word juncture may differ so much from those which are not, and differences determined
by word juncture may have so many features in common, that it becomes convenient to
arrange all statements involving word juncture environments together. In other languages,
however, where many statements apply to environments both within words and across
word juncture, it is simpler not to distinguish external from internal sandhi.
18 Bloomfield, TCLP 8,105-15, no. 18.
19 Ibid., no. 15.
20 Ibid., no. 18.
21 E.g. the complete difference between go and wen- exists only between these two sequences of phonemes, hence (barring homonyms) only in this particular unit. However,
the partial difference between knife and knive- can occur between any two sequences of
phonemes that contain IfI and Iv/.
22 Bloomfield, TCLP 8,105-15, no. 13.
23 Except for sequences of unique alternants (see last paragraph of § 4.2). Such cases
should be indicated in a special list of alternative possibilities.
3

4

3

DISCONTINUOUS MORPHEMES

This paper attempts to generalize the term MORPHEME so as to apply not only
to sequences of successive phonemes but also to broken sequences. In so doing,
it offers a method of expressing one of the possible relations between
morphemes as previously understood. 1 The relation in question is that which
obtains between two or more morphemes that always occur together (in a
given environment). The essence of the method is that any two or more
continuous morphemes which always occur together shall be considered to
constitute together a single new morpheme. Since this relation between
continuous morphemes is a type of grammatical agreement, the method
here proposed obviates the necessity of separately treating this type of
agreement.
1. It is convenient to summarize the forms that may be found among the
continuous morphemes, so that we may see to what extent the new forms will
differ.
Most morphemes in most languages have been described as sequences of
consecutive phonemes: for instance lifJI in speaking, writing.
Rarely, it is convenient to recognize a minus morpheme, which consists of
the dropping of any phoneme occupying a particular position, e.g. the
dropping of the last consonant, which constitutes a morpheme meaning
'masculine' in Bloomfield's analysis of French adjectives. 2
Morphemes involving replacement of one phoneme by another may then
be considered as consisting of the dropping of one phoneme and the adding
of the other (i.e. as combinations of the first two types). Thus men contains
two morphemes: man; and - Irei + lei 3, which means 'plural'.
It is also necessary to recognize that some morphemes do not consist of the
traditional phonemes at all, but of phonemic contours which may extend
over many phonemes. An example is the rising intonation I?I which indicates
a question in American English.
Lastly, morphemes which are complementary to each other in distribution,
and which satisfy certain other criteria, may be conveniently considered as
Language 21, No.2 (1945),121-7.

36

DISCONTINUOUS MORPHEMES

37

being merely alternants (positional variants) of one morpheme. Thus the lsi
which occurs in The book- are here, the Izl which occurs in The boy- are here,
and the - lrel + lei which occurs in The man- are here may all be included in
one morphemic unit {s} 4 which has these three variants in these three
environments. I)
GENERALIZING THE MORPHEME DEFINITION

2.0. In this section it will be seen that the definition of MORPHEME as implicitly
used by most linguists today can be extended to include discontinuous morphemes.
Why do we consider paper as one morpheme rather than two? Roughly, it
is because every time the form occurs, with the meaning of 'paper', it is the
whole phonemic sequence /peyp~r/ that appears; we do not find IpeyI without
Ip~r/, or Ip~rl without Ipey/, yielding partial meanings whose combination,
in the combined form /peyp~r/, would be 'paper'.6
In the continuous morphemes, the fundamental criterion which determines
that the whole of a sequence of phonemes constitutes one morpheme rather
than two, is the fact that the whole sequence occurs together in a certain class
of positions and with certain meanings, and that parts of the sequence do not
occur separately with parts of the total meaning of the sequence. Precisely
this criterion is found to apply to what will be proposed below as discontinuous morphemes.
2.1. In some cases we have two unique (continuous) morphemes which
always occur together, though not next each other. In Yokuts, whenever
na'a$ occurs, a verb with the suffix -af occurs with it; and whenever the
verb-suffix -al occurs, na'a$ occurs nearby. Together, they indicate uncertainty of the action; it would presumably be impossible to give the
descriptive meaning of each one of them, since they never occur separately:
hina' ma' na'a$ xat-al 'Perhaps you might eat', tunac na'a$ so: goal '(He)
might pull out the cork', xatxat-al na'a$ '(He) might eat repeatedly'.?
Instead of saying that we have here two morphemes which always occur
with each other, we can say that we have just one morpheme whose phonemes
are not consecutive: na'a$ ... -af (with the rarer variant -al ... na'a$). We thus
obviate the need for a restrictive statement about the two continuous
morphemes. Such simple discontinuous morphemes are infrequent. 8
2.2. On the other hand, repeated (continuous) morphemes appear in many
languages. In Gk. croeprov u<i£AeproV 'of wise brothers', we have a continuous
morpheme roy 'genitive plural' about which the special statement must be
made that it occurs twice in this phrase. We might say: if roy occurs after
u<i£Aep-, and if croep- occurs before, then roY will also occur after croep-; i.e.

38

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

noun and adjective agree as to gender, number, and case. However, since the
two occurrences of rov always appear together and are always identically
replaced, as in O"mp0 UOcA,cp0 'to a wise brother', we might say alternatively: there is a morpheme ... rov ... rov which occurs in O"ocp- aocA,cp-, and
in other adjective-noun sequences; similarly, there is a morpheme .··0 ... 0,
etc. When we say this, no special statement is needed about the concurrence
of the two rov forms: they occur together because they are parts of one
morpheme.
2.3. This type of analysis does not require that the two parts of the
morpheme be identical. In 0"0cp0 avopi 'to a wise man', we say that there is a
morpheme ... <p •.• i which occurs in O"ocp- avop-, and in other sequences of
adjective plus third-declension noun.
2.4. Following the practice of grouping complementary morphemes of
identical meaning into single morphemic units, we consider such morphemes
as ... 0 ... 0 and ... 0 ... f to be both variants of the dative (masculine) singular
morpheme 9, the second variant occurring when the noun is of the third
declension.
2.5. The single rov which occurs in UOcA,cprov 'of brothers', the ... rov ... rov
which occurs in O"mprov aocA,cprov, and the ... rov ... rov ... rov which occurs in
'trov crocprov aocA,cprov 'of the wise brothers', are all complementary to each
other, since the first occurs only with single nouns, the second only with a
sequence of two morphemes of the article, adjective, or noun classlO, the
third only with a sequence of three morphemes of the article, adjective, or
noun class. We may therefore say that rov, ... rov ... rov, ... rov ... rov ... rov, etc.
are all variants of one morphemic unit {rov} 'genitive plural'. Which variant
of the unit occurs depends on the environment, i.e. on the number of
morphemes of the article, adjective, or noun class appearing together.
Similarly, 0, .. ·0 .. ·0, .. ·0 ... f, .. ·0 ... 0 ... 0, etc. are all variants of one
morphemic unit {0} 'dative (masculine) singular'; which of these variants
occurs depends on the number and declension of the morphemes in the
environment.
2.6. One of the major advantages of this method, i.e. of considering morphemic repetitions as variants of one morpheme, is the fact that the environment of each variant often turns out to be syntactically identical with the
environment of every other variant of the same morphemic unit. The
morphemic unit can in such cases be referred to the syntactic domain as a
whole, while the particular variants of the unit each occur with particular
morphemic forms of that domain. Thus the morphemic units {rov} and {0}
always occur over the whole of a noun phrase in Greek, and may in fact be
considered suffixes of the noun phrase as such. If the phrase consists of only
one noun, the variant is rov (or 0). If the phrase consists of two stem mor-

DISCONTINUOUS MORPHEMES

39

phemes - say adjective and noun or article and noun - the variant is .. .{bv
.•• {bv (or ... 4> ... 4»; and so on.
The syntactic domain of a repetitive morpheme may be more complicated.
In the Semitic languages, the domain of the feminine morpheme and of the
plural morpheme is the noun phrase and the following verb (or the preceding
verb, if there is no following verb within the clause contour). Thus in Modern
Hebrew there are the following types of clauses:
is diber
isa dibra.
is cair diber.
isa caira dibra.
is cair madaber.
isa caira madaberet.
isa caira dibra fais cairo

A man spoke.
A woman spoke.
A young man spoke.
A young woman spoke.
A young man is speaking.
A young woman is speaking.
A young woman was talking to a young man.

The morphemic unit {a} 'feminine' consists of an la/ 11 repeated after each
noun (including adjective) in a noun phrase and after the following verb.
However, as the last example shows, the domain of the {a} does not extend
to nouns following the nouns and verb.
3.0. A complicated example of discontinuous repetitive morphemes may be
found in the Bantu languages. There every noun stem always occurs with a
particular class prefix, and every adjective, pronoun, or preposition which
follows it, and the verb whose subject the noun is, all have the same class
prefix or one related to it. In Swahili 12 we find utterances like the following 13:
1. walikuja *wanawake they-came women two (two women came)
wawili
2. *watu wa-ufaa
people of-Europe come
wamewanza
3. *mtu mwenye nguvu man having strength
4. huyu *mke wa-jamaa this woman of-countryman mine, she-told-me
yangu, amenambia
5. *i!io i!a-'alimu
school of-religion closed
i!imekuija
6. *mikono haina nguvu arms having-no strength
7. hiki *kiti kizuri
this chair fine from-Europe, it-got-broken
ca-uiaa, kimevunjika

In each utterance, the word marked with an asterisk is a noun which occurs
only with the singular or plural class prefix preceding it. The morpheme tu

40

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

'person' appears here after the singular m and plural wa ('person class'), as
does the morpheme for 'woman'. The morphemes ;0 'school' and Ii 'chair'
appear after the singular ki (variant c: 'thing class'). The morpheme kono
'arm' occurs with the plural mi ('tree class'). The nouns which occur with a
particular class prefix often have some aspect of meaning in common: e.g.
those that occur with m and wa refer to human beings. The class prefixes may
therefore be said to have this class meaning.
The other morphemes in the utterances listed above occur with various
class prefixes, depending on the one that precedes the noun. The class prefix
of the noun is repeated before the adjective (as wili 'two', zuri 'fine'), before
the verb whose subject the noun is (as liku3a 'came,' mevunjika 'got broken';
the variant of m before verbs is a as in amenambia 14 ), and after anyone of a
class of demonstrative morphemes which includes the pronouns (as hu 'this',
where yu is the variant of the class prefix m). The class prefix is also repeated
before other morphemes, which make a following noun phrase into an
adjective of the preceding noun phrase: a- 'of', wenye 'having', etc. Thus
ulaa 'Europe', which can occur as a noun phrase by itself, combines with ainto a-ulaa 'of Europe', which has the syntactic position of an adjective and
is preceded by a repetition of the class prefix of the noun before it: watu
wa-ulaa, kiti ca-ulaa. The noun after a- has its own class prefix ll>, unrelated
to that of the preceding noun but repeated in any adjectives which follow the
post-a- noun and refer to it: 3amaa yangu 'countryman of-me' ('class 3'
prefix y before -angu).16
3.1. It is possible to summarize all this by saying that the class prefixes
have discontinuous forms. The prefix in utterance 1 above would be wa ...
wa ... wa ... , a variant of {wa} indicating person class plural; in utterance 3
m ... m ... , and in utterance 4 ... yu m ... w ... a ... , both of these being variants
of {m} indicating person class singular; and in utterance 7 ... ki ki ... ki ... C...
ki ... , a variant of {ki} indicating thing class singular. The domain of the
discontinuous parts (whether repetitions or phonemically different parts) of
the new morphemes could in all cases be summarized by saying that the
parts of the new morpheme occupy as many of the following positions
(marked by dashes) as occur in the utterance: demonstrative- -noun -adjective
-adjectivizer (+ noun) -verb. If any other morphemes occur, they do not
affect the parts of the new morpheme. If various sections of this domain do
not occur, the parts of the new morpheme which would appear with them of
course do not occur either. We can now deal directly with our few discontinuous prefixes, the particular variant of each being always determined
by the form of the domain. Given the prefix {m} indicating single human
beings, if the domain is -noun the variant will be m ... ; if the domain is
demonstrative- -noun -verb, the variant will be ... yu m ... a .. . 17: thus if the

DISCONTINUOUS MORPHEMES

41

environment is -tu we obtain 1Jltu; if the environment is hu- -ke -menambia
we obtain huyu mke amenambia.
Instead of having to describe special relations among the prefixes (e.g.
between the m ofmke and the a of amenambia) and the repetition of the classprefix, we now list merely a few morphemes with somewhat complicated
variants, which spread out over a syntactically recognizable domain. 1s
3.2. One feature of special selection remains: particular nouns occur with
particular class-prefixes. Even this limitation can be avoided by considering
the class prefix, with all its discontinuous parts, as part of each noun. 19 The
morpheme for 'chair' is then not ti but {kiti,} where the ki part represents all
the variants discussed above: e.g. in the environment hi- - -zuri -a-u/aa 'this
fine - from Europe', the variant of {kiti} is ... ki kiti ki ... c.... Similarly, the
morpheme for 'man' is then not tu but {mtu}2o; and 'woman' not ke but
{mke}, which in the environment hu- - -menambia 'this - told me' would be
... yu mke a ....
If this combining of prefix and noun into one morpheme is carried out, it
will be necessary to mention that most nouns in the language begin with one
of only five phonemes (the others begin with the zero prefix which would not
appear here), and that it is only the first phoneme or the first pair of phonemes
which (with many variants) is repeated throughout the domain of the new
noun. 21 That is to say, all nouns have discontinuous repeated parts (varying
with the environment), but there are only some six sets of discontinuous
parts for each environment, and each noun has one or another of these six;
which one it is, is indicated by the initial phoneme of the noun, since it is only
that initial which (with its variants) is repeated. It will further have to be
mentioned that most of the nouns that have a similar initial (the initial that
repeats through the domain) also have some broad similarity in meaning:
e.g. those whose repeated initial is m refer to human beings. This would be on
a par with such facts as the meaning-element common to English morphemes
which begin with sl (slush, slide, slick, etc.), though the Bantu correlation is
far more thoroughgoing.
CONCLUSIONS

The considerations of §§ 2-3 show the possibility of a general treatment of
morphemes which occur together.
4.1. Given some particular environment, if two morphemes X and Y
depend on each other so that neither occurs without the other (in that
environment), we say that X and Y constitute together one new morpheme
Z which simply occurs in the environment. 22 The environment may be stated
in terms of particular morphemes, e.g. Swahili hi- - -zuri 'this fine -', or in
terms of morpheme classes and syntactic constructions, e.g. demonstrative-

42

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

(noun) -adjective. The more general the environment is, the greater advantage there is in combining X and Y, which are mutually dependent within
it, into one morpheme Z. And the greater the variability of the environment
(e.g. if it is a noun phrase which may consist of any number of nouns,
adjectives, etc.), the more different types of repetition and variation of
dependent morphemes are expressed by the single discontinuous morpheme.
Thus the Swahili noun phrase may be kiti alone, or hiki kiti, or kiti kizuri, or
hiki kiti kizuri, etc., and the discontinuous noun, whether {kiti} or any other,
has corresponding variants for each form of the noun phrase. 23
4.2. An apparent loss of descriptive efficiency arises here. If each Swahili
noun partakes of one out of only six repeated initials, does that not mean
that the six initials are more general, and should be treated separately from
the many individual nouns? But, for that matter, all Swahili morphemes
partake of only some 21 phonemes; yet we do not on the whole consider the
phonemes to be general classifiers of morphemes. It is true that we discuss the
phonemes independently of the morphemes, and similarly we should discuss
the repeated initials independently of the individual nouns. But we should
discuss them merely as a feature of the phonemic composition of a class of
Swahili morphemes, namely the fact that these morphemes are discontinuous
and that the discontinuity consists in the repeating of the initial (or of a
substitute for it) in stated positions throughout a certain domain. All this
does not require us to set up the repeated initial as a separate morpheme.
The fact that these repeated initials often have an element of meaning the meaning common to all the nouns that begin with them - permits us to
set them up as separate morphemes only if we are prepared to set up the sl
of English slide, slick, etc. as a separate morpheme on a similar basis.24 If we
wish to recognize such formally dependent but semantically general elements
as morphemes, we should reject the extension of § 3.2. However, we should
keep the basic method of § 3.1, which places the agreeing morphemes into
one repeated morpheme.
4.3. The condition stated in the first sentence of § 4. I is exactly that which
determines whether two consecutive phonemes are parts of the same morpheme. The new discontinuous morpheme is thus distribution ally the same
as the old continuous morphemes. The only difference between new and old
is in the very feature which distinguishes them, i.e. in their continuity. The
difference in continuity, therefore, does not correlate with any other difference
between them, and in the new definition, which takes no note of continuity,
the continuous morphemes are merely a special case, and a simple one, of
morphemes as a whole.

DISCONTINUOUS MORPHEMES

43

NOTES
1 Where it is necessary to distinguish between morphemes recognized without applying
the method here proposed, and the morphemes which result from the application of this
method, the former will be called continuous morphemes, and the latter new.
2 Leonard Bloomfield, Language.
3 Read: minus lrel plus leI. In the pair man: men, it is of course arbitrary to consider
men rather than man as containing two morphemes. We might have said that man consists
of men plus a morpheme indicating 'singular'. We might also have said that man and men
are two unrelated single morphemes. The choice among these ways of analyzing man and
men depends on the relation of these morphemes to other morphemes in the language, and
to the utterances in which they occur.
4 Braces { } will be used to indicate morphemic units.
5 See Z. S. Harris, 'Morpheme Alternants in Linguistic Analysis', Lg. 18 (1942), 169-80
(Paper 2 of this volume), where it is shown that such groupings of morphemes into one
morphemic unit can be performed, without arbitrariness or resort to meaning on the basis
of distributional criteria.
6 More rigorous criteria, with less reliance upon meaning, can be stated, but are not
necessary for the present purpose.
7 Stanley Newman, Yokuts Language of California, 1944, 120.
8 Leonard Bloomfield, Language, 180. The late Manuel J. Andrade showed me in 1940 a
similar case in his Guatemalan material.
9 These morphemes can of course be broken down into case, number, and (usually) gender
morphemes, but that is not relevant here.
10 E.g. it occurs also in 't- u1)EAtp-, as in 'trov u1)EAtproV 'of the brothers'.
11 Or letl after the present tense morpheme.
12 I am indebted to Nathan Glazer for obtaining these utterances from our informant,
and for his valuable collaboration in the Swahili research of the Intensive Language
Program of the American Council of Learned Societies.
13 The phonetic value of a space is to indicate loud stress on the second vowel before it.
The letters may be pronounced with their usual values for an approximation to Swahili
sounds.
14 When an object of the verb is stated, its class prefix may also be repeated before the
verb, after the subject class prefix.
15 In the case of ulaa, it is u ('class 6'). The noun laa occurs with the class prefix u. The
sequence a-ulaa occurs with the class prefix of the noun which precedes it.
16 When a noun is followed by an adjective plus an adjectival noun phrase (i.e. a noun
phrase preceded by a-), the adjectival noun phrase comes last. Hence there is no confusion
as to whether an adjective refers directly to the head noun or to the noun that is preceded
by a- (even if both are of the same class): if the adjective follows the a- noun, it refers to it.
17 Allowing for variations which depend on the particular demonstrative, etc.
18 These few discontinuous morphemes may indeed be considered to be the ultimate noun
class of the language, since the nouns may be considered to modify these class prefixes in
somewhat the same way that the adjectives modify the nouns. The formal relation, however, is not the same, since nouns are limited to particular class prefixes whereas adjectives
are not limited to particular nouns.
19 I am indebted for this suggestion to Freeman Twaddell, and have also profited from a
discussion of the question with Bernard Bloch.
20 The 'person class' plural wa would have to be broken into two morphemes, one a plural
having the same domain as the class prefixes, the other a variant of the 'person class' prefix
which occurs only in the environment of the new plural morpheme.
21 Since the domain of the class prefix now becomes the domain of the noun, or rather of
its first phoneme or two.
22 X and Y would traditionally be described as being in agreement. The present method
replaces this agreement relation by a single morpheme Z. The method can clearly be

44

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

extended so as to replace other types of grammatical agreement by single morphemes, but
the results would not be as simple as in this limited type.
23 The fact that we have to state the environment in order to know the form of our discontinuous morpheme in each particular occurrence, means that the environment functions
as an independent factor in determining the variant of our new morpheme. Therefore it is
possible to generalize the present method, and to take any two morphemes, and treat any
factor which determines their coexistence as part of their environment. However, it is descriptively advantageous to do so only if the environment or the variation is of a general
character, or correlates with other features of the language.
24 With a by-product of such forlorn morphemes as -ide, -ick, etc.

4

FROM MORPHEME TO UTTERANCE

1.0. This paper presents a formalized procedure for describing utterances
directly in terms of sequences of morphemes rather than of single morphemes. 1
It thus covers an important part of what is usually included under syntax.
When applied in a particular language, the procedure yields a compact statement of what sequences of morphemes occur in the language, i.e. a formula
for each utterance (sentence) structure in the language.
1.1. At present, morpheme classes are formed by placing in one class all
morphemes which are substitutable for each other in utterances, as man
replaces child in The child disappeared. The procedure outlined below consists,
essentially, in extending the technique of substitution from single morphemes
(e.g. man) to sequences of morphemes (e.g. intense young man). In so far as it
deals with sequences, it parallels the type of analysis frequently used in syntax,
so that the chief usefulness of this procedure is probably its explicitness rather
than any novelty of method or result.
1.2. The reason for a procedure of the type offered here is not far to seek.
One of the chief objectives of syntactic analysis is a compact description of
the structure of utterances in the given language. The paucity of explicit
methods in this work has made syntactic analysis a tedious and often largely
intuitive task, a collection of observations whose relevance is not certain and
whose interrelation is not clear. Partly as a result of this, many grammars
have carried little or no syntactic description. In many of the descriptions
that have been written, the lack of explicit methods has permitted the use of
diverse and undefined terms and a reliance on semantic rather than formal
differentiation.
If we now seek a clearer method for obtaining generalizations about the
structure of utterances in a language, it should preferably deal with the
simplest observables. These are the morphemes, which are uniquely identifiable and easy to follow. Constructs such as 'morphological levels' may be
useful in particular cases, but there is an advantage in avoiding them if we
can achieve the same results by direct manipulation of the observable
morphemes. The method described in this paper will require no elements other
Language 22, No.3 (1946), 161-83.
4:)

46

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

than morphemes and sequences of morphemes 2, and no operation other
than substitution, repeated time and again.
THE ELEMENTS

2.0. We assume, then, that we have isolated the morphemes of the language.
An exact list of the morphemes is of course required for any description of
the language, no matter what method is followed. It is possible to obtain
somewhat different lists of morphemes, depending on certain choices made
at the start.
2.1. We might say that a particular phoneme sequence which has widely
divergent meanings represents more than one morpheme: homonyms such as
pair and pear, or make in What make is it? and She's on the make. Alternatively, we may say that the sequence (fpeyr/ or /meyk/) constitutes only
one morpheme under any circumstances.
2.2. We may say that each morpheme can have only one phonemic form,
so that for example the English plural endings /s/, /z/, /';Jz/ (as in books, chairs,
glasses) constitute three morphemes, and am, are constitute two morphemes.
Alternatively, we may include each of these sets in a single morpheme, if we
say that different phoneme sequences constitute positional variants of one
morpheme when they are complementary to each other.3
2.3. We could say, as is usually done, that repeated morphemes express
concord, as in Latin feminine -a in mensa parva 'the small table' or the
modern Hebrew article ha (and feminine -a) in haisa haktana 'the small
woman'. Alternatively, we could say that in each of these cases we have not a
repeated word-suffix or word-prefix, but rather a single phrase-infix consisting, in the case of the Hebrew article, of the phonemes /ha/ before every
noun-morpheme (including adjectives) in a noun phrase. This would mean
that instead of our being given a morpheme ha and having to state that it
occurs only with certain syntactic selections, we are given a morpheme which
we may write ha ... ha ... and which has no further limitations of selection,
but either occurs or does not occur in a phrase, just as do the other morphemes. If the phrase contains the morpheme for 'man' and 'small', it is is
katan 'small man'; if it also contains the morpheme for 'the', it is hais
hakatan; if it also contains the morpheme for 'feminine', it is isa ktana; if it
contains both, it is haisa haktana. 4
2.4. In the alternatives presented in §§ 2.2-3 above we find that in each
paragraph the first method yields phonemically simple morphemes about
which statements of selection remain to be made. Thus, we would have to say
somewhere that the plural morpheme /s/ occurs only after morphemes
ending in a voiceless consonant; that am occurs only after I; that when parv-

FROM MORPHEME TO UTTERANCE

47

is in one phrase with mensa it always has -a following; and that whenever ha
occurs with one noun it will also occur with all other nouns in the phrase.
The second method in each case offers phonemically more complicated
morphemes which have fewer special limitations of selection as distinguished
from other morphemes.
Each method clearly has its advantages and its uses. The syntactic procedure to be indicated below can be carried out regardless of the method
followed in setting up the morphemes. However, as will be seen, the fewer
limitations of selection we have to deal with, the simpler will be this syntactic
procedure. Therefore, in the examples used in this paper it will be assumed
that the morpheme list for the language concerned has been constructed by
the second method, i.e. that we have included in the phonemic form and
definition of the morpheme as many of its limitations as we could.
THE OPERATION

3.0. The procedure to be indicated below consists essentially of repeated substitution: e.g. child for young boy in Where did the - go? To generalize this,
we take a form A in an environment C - D and then substitute another form
B in the place of A. If, after such substitution, we still have an expression
which occurs in the language concerned, i.e. if not only CAD but also CBD
occurs, we say that A and B are members of the same substitution-class, or
that both A and B fill the position C - D, or the like.
The operation of substitution is basic in descriptive linguistics. Not only is
it essential in phonemics, but it is also necessary for the initial setting up of
morphemes, for the recognition of morpheme boundaries.
3.1. Morpheme Classes. The first step in our procedure is to form substitution classes of single morphemes. We list, for the language ~oncerned, all
single morphemes which replace each other in the substitution test, i.e. which
occur in the same environments (have the same selection). If any of them do
not occur in the same order, they are placed in a special sub-class. Thus,
Moroccan Arabic n- 'I will' and -t 'r did' are mutually substitutable, although
they occur at different points in the order of morphemes: ana nmsi Id'aru 'I'll
go to his house', ana msit Id'aru 'I went to his house'.
3.2. In making these substitution classes of morphemes we may be faced
with many problems. In some languages, relatively few morphemes occur in
exactly the same environments as others: poem occurs in I'm writing a whole this time, but house does not. Both morphemes, however, occur in That's a
beautiful -. Shall we say that poem and house belong in general to the same
substitution class, or that they have some environments in common and
some not?

48

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

It will be seen that the method proposed in §§ 3.5-9 below can be used no
matter how this problem is met. s However, in order to keep the examples of
§§ 4-6 as simple as possible, it will be assumed here that morphemes having
slightly different distributions are grouped together into one class if the
distributional differences between their environments correspond to the
distributional differences between the morphemes. That is, if poem and house
differ distributionally only in the fact that poem occurs with write and house
with wire, and in comparable differences, and if write and wire in turn differ
only in that write occurs with poem and wire with house, and in comparable
differences, we put poem in one class with house, and simultaneously put
write in one class with wire.
3.3. Other differences of environment are less easily handled. English cover
occurs after both un- and dis-, while dress occurs only after uno, connect only
after dis-, and take after neither (but connected occurs also after un-). On the
other hand, cover, dress, connect, and take all occur before -ing, and in
environments like Let's not - it just now. Here again, shall we group these
into the same morpheme class, or into four different classes? That is, should
the classes to be used in our method below be set up on the basis of relation
to -ing, or on the basis of relation to uno? We find that the selections which
these four have in common (their occurrence before -ing and in Let's not - it
just now) differentiate them from other large substitution classes, such as
India, child, or to, from, which do not occur in these positions. On the other
hand, the selections in which they differ do not differentiate or equate
morphemes in a way that is useful in analyzing many utterances. Although
un- occurs before some of the morphemes which occur before -ing, we also
find un- before a few of the morphemes which occur not before -ing but in
the - man: e.g. just, true. s
As in the case of § 3.2, the method to be described below is applicable
regardless of the definition of morpheme class that we select. If we put cover,
dress, connect, and take into four different classes on the basis of relation to
uno, we will be able to group the classes together later on the basis of their
relation to -ing. And if we treat them as members of one class on the basis of
-ing, we will have to note that they differ distributionally (as sub-classes) with
respect to uno. For brevity, we will here consider them as members of one
morpheme class.
3.4. In some cases of morphemes having one environment but not another
in common, both the similarity and the difference are relevant for utterance
structure. Thus cover, note, find all occur in -ing, We'll- his path, as well as
in -s ('plural'), You can have my -. But think occurs only in the first two
types of environment, and child only in the last two. 7 In general, practically
all morphemes which occur in - ing also occur in many environments like

FROM MORPHEME TO UTTERANCE

49

We'll - his path. Similarly, almost all morphemes which occur in - s ('plural')
occur also in many environments like You can have my -. We will therefore
recognize these two sets of positions as being diagnostic, and will say that
every morpheme which occurs in several environments of one of these two
sets is a member of the substitution class which is identified as occurring
in that set of positions. There will be two such classes: cover, note,find, think;
and cover, note, find, child. The fact that many morphemes occur in both
classes is not relevant at this point, since some do not. 8
3.5. Morpheme Sequences. The chief novelty in the procedure which is
offered here is the extension of substitution classes to include sequences of
morphemes, not merely single morphemes. We now ask not only if A and B
each occur in the environment C-D but also if AE together, or FGH, also
occur in that environment. If they do, then A, B, AE, FGH are all substitutable for each other. We may say that they are all members of one
substitution class, which is now not merely a class of morphemes but a class
of morpheme sequences. The single morphemes in the class are merely the
special cases where the sequence consists of one.
Thus we note that in Please put the book away we can substitute for book
not only other single morphemes like bottle or brandy but also sequences of
two and more morphemes like books, bank-book, brandy bottle, bottle of
brandy, silly green get-up. These sequences differ in various respects: in
brandy bottle each of the component morphemes could have been substituted
singly for book; in books only the first could; in silly green get-up no one of
the morphemes could (in most utterances) have alone been substituted for
book. These differences, however, are not relevant to the essential criterion of
our present procedure, which is merely whether or not the sequences are
substitutable for each other.
3.6. In the case above, and in most applications of this procedure, we have
single morphemes for which the sequences can be substituted. That means
that the sequences of morphemes do not yield new classes; we simply group
them with various morpheme classes which we have already obtained in the
usual manner described in § 3.l. We may say that in any such application of
our procedure, we reduce sequences to the status of single morphemes (or of
environmental classes of single morphemes).
However, there may be sequences of morphemes which occur in environments where single morphemes do not occur, i.e. where they cannot be
replaced by any single morpheme. Such sequences mayor may not be useful
as elements of the utterance structure. For example, Semitic roots plus verb
patterns occur in environments in which no single morpheme occurs. They
occur before verb suffixes, after verb prefixes, and in various sentence
positions such as (in early Semitic) before an accllsative noun (presumably

50

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

with command intonation): thus, in classical Arabic, root ftb 'open' and
pattern (i)--a- 'command' in ifta/:z ilbtiba 'open the door!'. In all these
environments we always find the sequence of some root plus some pattern;
we never find a single morpheme here. We may consider this sequence to
constitute an element in the utterance structure, calling it, say, verb stem.
3.7. Since our procedure now permits us to make any substitutions of any
sequences, it may become too general to produce useful results. For example,
we might take the utterance I know John was in and substitute certainly for
know John, obtaining I certainly was in. This substitution conceals the fact
that the morphemes of I know John was in can be said as two utterances
instead of as one, if we make the single change of pronouncing its intonation
twice, over the first two words and again over the last three, instead of once
over all five. That is, it conceals the fact that I know John was in can be
described as two sentences strung under one sentence intonation. It further
conceals the fact that certainly may also occur in a different place in the
sentence: I was certainly in, whereas know John would occur only in the one
position. And it conceals the concord of was with John: for if we substituted
we for I, we would still have was in We know John was here, but were in We
certainly were here. All this suggests that substitution of sequences be so
carried out as to satisfy all manipulations of that environment which forms
the frame of the substitution. 9
3.8. In the following sections (§§ 4, 5), this procedure will be carried out, in
a very sketchy manner, for English and for Hidatsa, a Siouan language of
North Dakota. There will of course be no attempt to approach even remotely
a complete analysis for either language. The purpose of these descriptions is
only to show the general lines of the procedure; countless details, as well as
some of the types of utterance in each language, will be omitted.
3.9. Equations will be used to indicate substitutability. BC = A will mean that
the sequence consisting of a morpheme of class B followed by a morpheme
of class C can be substituted for a single morpheme of class A. In cases where
unclarity may arise, we shall write B + C for the sequence BC. When we want
to say that A substitutes for B only if C follows, we shall write AC=BC.
ENGLISH

4.1. The Morpheme Classes. For the purposes of the English examples, we
shall set up the following classes of morphemes, on the criterion that for each
class there are particular sentence positions which can be filled by any member
of that class and by these alone. 10
N: morphemes which occur before plural -s or its alternants, or after the or
adjectives: hotel, butter, gain, one 11, two.

51

FROM MORPHEME TO UTTERANCE

V: before oed past or its alternants; before -ing; after N plus should, will,
might, etc.: go, gain, take, think, will ('desire'), have, do. We may distinguish
several sub-classes such as those listed below, while V without any subclass mark will be used to indicate all the sub-classes together.
Vb: be, appear, become, get, keep, stay, etc. (but not have). These occur between
N and adjectives other than V -ing: The stuff will stay fresh.l 2
Vc: verbs which occur between N and V -ing: stop, try, be in Mac willwalking.
Vd: the transitive verbs which occur before N: make, buy, want (but not go,
sleep) in I'll-butter.
Ve: intransitive verbs. which do not occur before N: go, sleep.
T-f: verbs which occur before two independent N's: make, consider, want (but
not buy, go) in I'll-this book a best seller.
VII" verbs (often causative in meaning) which occur before NV(a noun phrase
followed by a verb phrase): make, let, see (but not consider, buy, go) in
I'd like to-newcomers try it.
Vh: verbs which occur before N to V: cause, teach, dare, want (but not make,
go) in The other kids-Junior to do it.
R: between N and V (the V lacking -ing, oed); NRVoccurs initially, or after a
list of V including think, guess (/ think the boy can win it): will, do, shall,
can, may, must, ought (but not to). The -s of 3rd-person-singular concord
does not occur with these, nor does -ing. Should can be considered as
shall + -ed, and so on.
have, be: appearing in R positions and in some other positions. These two
have the Os, -ed, and -ing occurring after them. After have the V is
followed by -en (if that particular member of the class V ever has -en, it
has it also after have), and after be by -en or -ing: we are going, we have
taken 13 , as compared with we did go. When a position is discussed below
in which R, had, be can all occur equally, the abbreviation R will be used
to indicate all three.
A: between the and N, never before plural-s: young, pretty, first.
D: between the and A, but not between the and N: rather, very, now, not.
Many of these, e.g. now, occur in various positions in the utterance (after
V: Don't look now; before V: He now wishes it weren't; at the beginning of
an utterance, with a level 1,1 intonation: Now, what's up ?). Some adverbs,
e.g. very, do not occur in most of these positions. When we wish to indicate only the more widely-occurring ones, to the exclusion of very and the
like, we write D In more detailed analysis, many more sub-classes of D
would be necessary.
T: before N, or A, or DA, but not before V (unless -ing or-ed or-en follow it):
a, my, some. These may all be considered as substituting for the and so
Q

Q•

52

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

forming an article-class. Here we must include all, which, in addition to
occurring in the above positions also occurs before T (all the very good
people as well as all very good people); also the cardinal numbers, which
occur not only in T position but also after T (my two very uncertain
suggestions as well as the two very new suggestions, two very new suggestions, parallel to the very new suggestions).
I: before or after V, after from, before, but not after A or T or before plural
-s: it, all, some, now, here. 14 Some morphemes in this class do not occur
after from, before, etc., or after utterance-initial V: he, I. Others do not
occur before V unless NV precedes them: me.
P: before N, T, A, D, I, and before V only if -ing follows: of, from. Several
morphemes in this preposition class also occur after certain V; when they
are in this position we mark them Ph: up, off, over (walk off, beat up).
Some prepositions (marked Pe) sometimes alternate with zero when an
N which precedes PeN is placed after the (Pe)N: to, for in They're giving
a present to the boss, They're buying a present for the boss, are replaced by
zero in They're giving the boss a present, They're buying the boss a present.
This does not occur with from as in He's receiving a raise from the
boss.
-Nn: After Nand before anything which follows N: -let, -eer, -er, -ess, (playlet,
engineer, Londoner, lioness).
- Vv: After V and before anything which follows V: past -ed, 3rd person
singular -s (rowed, rows).
-A a: After A and before anything which follows A: -er, -est, -ish (older, oldest,
oldish).
-Nv: after N and before anything which follows V14: -ize, -(i)fy (colonize,
beautify)·
-Na: -ful, -ish, -th, -'s (beautiful, boyish, sixth, parent's).
- Vn: -ment, -ion, -er, -ing (atonement, abolition, writer, writing in Writing is
just what he hates).
-Va: -able, -ing, -ed, -en (likable, a shining light, the cooked meal, his shaven
head).
-An: -ness, -ty (darkness, cruelty).
-Av: -en, -ize, (darken, solemnize).
-Ad: -ly (really).
Nv-: before N, and after anything which precedes V15: be-, en- (bedevil,
enshrine).
Xd'-: before morphemes of several classes, chiefly Nor A. The combination,
consisting of these morphemes plus Xd'-, may be marked D'. It occurs
chiefly after V (often with intervening N, etc., as in Are you asleep ?):
a- (astray, afresh, asleep, ashore). D' is used here to indicate the adverbs

FROM MORPHEME TO UTTERANCE

53

which occur in this post-V position, since it is a position in which both
Da and A occur. D' sometimes occurs after N: A day ashore.
A v-: en- (enlarge).
Na-: pre-, anti-, pro- (pre-war, anti-war,pro-war).
Ap-: be- (below, behind).
Xx-: before any morpheme class or sequence, and after anything which preceded that same morpheme class. The environment of the morpheme
which follows is not affected by the addition of the Xx- morpheme, except
that it now contains that addition itself: dis-, re-, pre- (disorder, recall,
preview).
S: stems which occur only next to affixes, i.e. next to the 16 classes -Nn to
Xx- immediately preceding. These stems cannot be assigned to any of the
preceding classes N, V, A, D, etc., except by seeing if they occur with the
same affixes as N, etc. Thus, in society, social, it would have been possible, instead of considering soci- as S (as we do here), to consider it as A
when it occurs before -ety and N when it occurs before -al (compare
superiority, A -An and communal N -Na). However, what is nat- in
native? It could be either N or V before -ive, since -ive is both -Na and
-Va: massive, adoptive. We therefore put all such morphemes in the class
S. Many of the affixes in the classes above occur not only next to A, N,
or V, but also next to S.
&: conjunctions between any two sequences: and, but (I wanted to go, but
couldn't make it.) In some environments (e.g. in the example above) the
member of & is preceded by /,/ intonation; in other environments the /,/
intonation does not occur (e.g. war and peace without /,/).
B: in -NV /,/ NVor in NV /,/ NV: if, since, as, while (If you go, I won't).
The last subordinative and sometimes also the others lack the preceding
/,/ intonation when they are in the middle of the utterance: We fix it
while you wait. Some members of this class occur after A or N, etc.,
before NV, VN (Little as there is o/it,-. Man though he is,-.) These
will be marked Ba.
Finally, there remain various independent morphemes, some of which
occur almost anywhere in utterances, often set off by /,/: then, now, thus.
Others are set off either by 1,/ or by quote-intonation, or have 1./ by themselves: yes, no. Others usually have /1/ intonation by themselves: hello, oh.
4.2. We now consider sequences of these thirty-odd morpheme classes, to
see what sequences of morphemes can be substituted for single morphemes.
Sequences of morpheme classes which are found to be substitutable in
virtually all environments for some single morpheme class, will be equated
to that morpheme class: AN=N means that good boy, for example, can be

54

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

substituted for man anywhere. I6 If we write DA=A (quite old for old), then
DA can be substituted for A wherever A appears, e.g. in AN=N (oldfellow
for man, where we can substitute quite old for old, and obtain quite old
fellow DAN=AN=N).17 There is nothing to prevent us from substituting
DA for A even in the equation DA=A. We would then obtain DDA=A:
really quite old for old.
If, however, it proves impossible to substitute the equivalents of a symbol
for that symbol in some of its occurrences, we distinguish those occurrences
by giving the symbol a distinctive raised number. For instance, N -s=N:
paper +-s =paper; and papers can be substituted for paper in most environments. However, we cannot substitute N -s for the first N in this very
equation: we cannot substitute papers for the first paper and then add -s
again (papers+-s), as this equation would seem to indicate. We therefore
write N l -s=N 2 and state that wherever N 2 occurs we can substitute for it
any N l or another N 2 , while for N I we can only substitute any member of N l
(never N 2 ). Then it becomes impossible to construct a sequence papers+-s,
since papers is N 2 and -s is added only to N l •
The procedure in assigning these raised numbers which indicate uni-directional substitutability is in essence as follows: we assign raised 1 to each class
symbol, say X, when it first appears. Next time the X appears in an equation, we assign it the same number 1 if the equivalents of this X can be substituted for Xl in every equation which has so far been written. If the new X
cannot be substituted for all the preceding Xl we number it X2. If we later
obtain an X which cannot be substituted for all the preceding Xl or X 2, we
will number it X 3 , and so on. If some symbols never go above 1 we can
dispense with the raised number for them and merely write the symbol without
numbers.
On the left-hand side of the equations, each raised number will be understood to include all lower numbers (unless otherwise noted). Thus in TN 2 =
N 3 we have not only the men (N 2 ) equalling N 3 , but also the man (N 1 ). Any
N I can be substituted for the N 2 on the left side. On the right-hand side,
however, each number indicates itself alone: N 3 on the right can only
substitute for another N 3 , and N I ,2 for an N I or an N 2 •
4.3. Morpheme sequence equations for English now follow.
4.31. Equations involving N I , VI, Al are almost all cases of word formation, i.e. of adjoining morphemes within one loud-stress unit.
N I -Nn=N1 : e.g. for engineer we can substitute engine in I saw the-.
Al -An=N 1 : darkness for smell in I don't like the-here.
VI -Vn=NI: abolition for bread in We demand-. Note that abolition
(VI _Vn) is N 1 and can be followed by -Nn: abolitionist.

FROM MORPHEME TO UTTERANCE

55

N 1 -Nv= VI: e.g. colonize for conquer in The French Government -ed North
Africa.
Nv- N 1 = VI: enchant for scare in He - s them.
Al -Av= VI: sharpen for break in Don't-the knife.
Av- Al= VI: enlarge for print in Do you want to-it?
Al -Ad=D: beautifully or really for well in It's-finished.
Ap- Al =P: below for at in It fell- the dividing line.
D a Vi = VI: cordially despise for like in I-him (this applies if there is no
/,/ or I!I after Da; P N for Da is rare in this position).
Xd'-+any class (chiefly N 1 or AI)=D', where D' represents a class of words
which occur almost always after V, though not always immediately after:
asleep in He is -, He fell-, He is fast-; ashore in A day ashore.
Xx-+any class = that class: e.g. dislike for like in He really-s it.
S + any affix = the class indicated by the second letter in the affix mark: e.g.
S -Vn=NI: nature for life "in He loves-.
all + T= T: all my for some in We lost -books. When all is not followed by
T, it may itself be a member of T: all for the in -assertions are arbitrary.
T + cardinal number = T: Which two for which in - really modern composers?
When cardinal numbers are not preceded by T, they may themselves be
members of T: two for the in the sentence above.

As a result of these equations, we may consider affixes not as distinct
elements in the sentence structure, but merely as elements altering the
substitution class of the neighboring morphemes. The affix classes will no
longer appear in our picture of the sentence structure (except for special
cases of selection), since any structure into which they enter can also be
composed of N, V, A, D, and P morphemes.
4.32. We next obtain equations in which A 2 is necessary, though N 1 is still
adequate.
At -Aa=A2: e.g. oldish for old in Aren't they a bit-?
Vi -Va=A2: likeable for oldish in My-uncle. Note that the Vi can be obtained from N 1 -Nv: A heartening (N 1 -Nv - Va) thought.
D A2 =A2: completely false for false in That's a-statement. (D here from A
-Ad.)
A2 N1=N 1: peculiar fellow for Senator in Isn't he a-?18
A2 A2 N 1 =A2 N 1: Two adjoining A in a particular order, which we will call
the 'usual' (e.g. as between ambitious and young, ambitious is first in the
usual order), will be stressed AA (reduced loud, medial)19: ambitious
young, pretty dark, substitutable for funny in She is a - girl. If the adjectives are not in the usual order, or if they are in the usual order but

56

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

with greater note given to the second A, or if no usual order obtains
between them, or if the second A is composed of D A, the pattern is A
1,1 A: pretty, dark; dark, pretty; young, ambitious; ambitious, very young
in She is a - girl. 20
4.33. Equations involving N 2 and N 3 develop the noun-phrase.

N l -s=N 2: papers for paper in I'll get my-out.
N 2 -Na=A2: e.g. parents' for big in-day at school.
Na- N 2=A2: pro-war for big in a-industrialist.
N 2N 2=N l . 2: family heirloom substitutable for boy in It's a-. Albert
Einstein for Jim in - was here.

Any sequence including one loud stress and one or more reduced loud (or
medial) stresses=N l • 2 , Vl, or A l . 2, according to which of these may be substituted for the sequence. Most of these = N l :-blackbird (AN), by-pass (PN),
get-up (VPb), our third motor-boat crash (NNN). Some ending in A 2=A l . 2:
air-minded (N l A 2, the A 2 being a sequence of Vi - Va). Others = V l : They
by-passed it; They'll railroad (N l N l = Vl) the strike leader (NlN l = Nt,· N l
from Vi -Vn).
T N 2 = N 3: the orchestra or these pointless, completely transparent jokes for
butter in I don't like - .
T A2 (with no N following)=N 3 : The longer or the uncertain in- is what interests us more. The -s 'plural' does not occur after this N 3 substitute,
except in special cases.
N 3PN 4 =N 3: This piece of junk for the book in Who brought-here? The
occurrence of N 3 PN 3 in the position of N 3 or N 4 in the equations below
is restricted by various special selections for particular P. Repetition is
not frequent except when P is of: This piece of junk of my mother's=
N3PN3PN3=N3PN3=N3 (my mother's is TN -Na=T A 2=N 3).
4.34. Equations requiring V 2 to V4 develop the verb phrase.

Ra 110t = Ra: will not or have not or was not for will or have or was in I will
go.; Has he gone ?; I was going.
Ra N not= Ra N: did he not for did he in But-attempt it?
have Vi -en = V 2: have eaten for know in I-it.; I will- it.
V/ V 2 -ing = have Vel -en V2 -ing = V 2: be eating or stop eating or have stopped
eating for know in I-it now.
Vbl A 2 = have Vbl -en A 2 = V/: is gone or has been gone or seems neat or is
grayish for comes in He-now. Note that A2 on the left-hand side represents both neat (Al) and grayish (A 2).
R Vi =R= V2; will go or will for go in We-today.

FROM MORPHEME TO UTTERANCE

57

R N 4 V 2 ?=have N 4 V l -en ?=be N 4 V1 -en?=be N 4 V l -ing?=Ra N 4 ?=
N 4 V 2 ?: Did you talk or Haven't you gone or Are you taken or Are you
going or Were you in - with him?
V2 Pb= V2; walk off(V l ) or have walked off(V 2) for escape in We'll-before
them. The appearance of V2 on both sides of the equation means that
we can also obtain V2 Pb Pb= V 2, etc. This occurs in walk on over orfly
on up for go in Let's-. However, the selection and number of these

sequences of Pb is highly restricted, and detailed equations would have to
be given to indicate the selections which actually occur.
vi N 4 = V;: take it for go in I'll-now. When V 2 includes Pb' there arecertain V, Pb, and N for which the order is VNPb (I'll knock your opponent
down.), while for others the order is VPbN (I'll take over my father's
estate). The N 4 will be identified below.
VJ N 4 N 4 = Ve2: make Harding President for vote in We're going to-.
Vgl N 4 V 3 = V 3 : make him vote for vote in We 'll- your way.
Vb2 N 4 to V 3 = V 3 : force him to vote for vote in We 'll- your way.
vi Nt Pc N 4 = vi N 4 Ni= v;: For Pc and certain N, we find both the first
sequence (e.g. I'll make a party for my husband.), and the second (e.g.
I'll make my husband a party). The Nl with the subscript is used only to
identify the N in its two positions. The first sequence is identical with the
usual order, as in I'll get a nickel from my dad.
vi N 4 v4 (all under one sentence intonation) = Vd2 N 4 = Ve2: know he is for
know it in I-now. The N 4 V4 is thus the object of the Vr The V 4
indicates a full verb phrase, e.g. was as well as is in the example above.
V 3 to V 3 = V 3 : try to escape or kill the guard to avoid getting caf,lght in
Let's-here. Note that avoid getting caught is Vel vl wing V 1 -en = Vel Vb1
wing A2= Vel Ve2 -ing= V 2.
V 3 - VV= V 4: walked or walked off or had eaten or tried to escape for walk or
have eaten in I-alone. The - Vv is added to the first Vor R of the whole
V 3 phrase.
V4 Da= V 3 ,4: travel smoothly for go in We'll-in this place.
V 4 P N 4 = V3.4: travel in this place for go in Let's- today. For certain P N
and Da the order is V 3 Da P N; for others it is V 3 P N Da; compare the

two examples above.
4.35. The noun phrase is completed with the introduction of N 4. N 3 N 4
Vd4 =N 3 N 4 Ve4 P=N 4 : The clock hejixed or The house he slept in for The
clock in - is all right now. The second N in the sequence usually has reduced
stress, while the first N 3 and the end of the V 4 phrase (if it is not sentencefinal) usually have a level tone. The sequence N 3 N 4 V 4 here is therefore

distinguished formally, as well as in its environment, from the sequence

58

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

N 3 N 2 V 4 =N 3 V 4 (with N 3 N 2=N 3 ; since we have seen that N 2 N 2 =N 2
and this can be built up into an N 3 by completing the noun phrase before the
first N 2): The family heir-loom broke.
Since vl N 4 (fixed it) = Ve2 , and since Ve2 occurs in this equation only if P
follows, we see that vl N 4 (without P) is excluded from this sequence. We
may have N 3 Vd2 N 4 (He fixed it.), and we may have N J N 4 vl (the clock he
fixed); but we never have the first N J and the last N 4 together in one sequence
(there is no the clock he fixed it). We may therefore say that the first N 3
replaces the last N 4 • This indicates the semantic connection between these
two noun phrases, since each of them represents the object of vl.
I=N 4 : it for the room in Was-very hot? For each morpheme here we can
substitute a whole noun phrase, including I, i.e. anything equalling N 3 •
N 4 A2 P N 4 =T A2 N 2 VI -Va= V 3 -ing=N 4 : strawberries fresh from the
field or the best drinks obtainable or having you all substitutable for hope
in It was only-that kept me going.
PN 4=Da=D': These three classes, represented by in a moment or eventually
or ashore, all occur We'll do these things-, and less freely in-, we'll do
these things. However, since style and selection features differ markedly
for PN and Da , detailed statements would be needed to specify in each
equation which is more frequent.
N 3 /,/=P N 4 /,/: Some day, for in a moment, in the utterances above. This
applies only to particular N 3 ; detailed statements of selection or equations
involving particular sub-classes of N would be necessary.
Quoted material=N 4 (with special quote-intonation); "Not today, thanks"
or "wanted" for this in He said-in a loud voice.
4.36. Subordinations and Coordinations.

A2 Ba=N 4 Ba=B: Little as or Child though or Since in-he is, I like him.
B N 4 V 4 =p N 3 N 4 V4=N4 V 3 -ing= V 3 -ing=P N 4: Jfhe goes home or In
the event that he goes home or Everyone haVing left or Being at home are all
substitutable for At night in-, he'l/lock up the house.
any class+&+same class = same class: records and new needles (N 2 & N 2 )
for records (N 2) in I have-for you today.
V 4 1,1 & V 4 = V 4 : found it but lost it again for found it after We.
4.37. Equations involving whole utterances.

P N4, N 4 V 4 =N 4 v4, P N 4 =P N 4 N 4 V 4=N 4 v4 P N 4: At night, it's too
hard.; It's too hard, at night.; At night it's too hard.; It's too hard at night.
The morpheme 1,1 before or after P N 4 or any of its substitutes underscores the conditional meaning.

FROM MORPHEME TO UTTERANCE

59

&+any utterance = that utterance: But John 1for John!; And I know that too.
for I know that too. Only a few conjunctions occur frequently in this
position.
N 4 V 4 /,/ & N 4 V 4 =N 4 V4; For any N 4 V 4 utterance we may substitute
two N 4 V 4 sequences with a conjunction between them, and with reduced
loud stress on the second: I know, but I can't tell. for I know.
4.4. A check of the preceding equations will show that all morpheme classes
and all sequences of morphemes, except the independent ones in the last paragraph of § 4.1, occur in positions where they can be replaced by N 4 or V 4 •
We can therefore state in terms of these classes what sequences of morphemes
occur in English utterances. The great majority of English utterances are a
succession of the following forms:
N 4 V 4 with /'/' /?/, or other intonations; with N 4 (=PN 4 = D a ), independent

morphemes, and successive repetitions introduced by &, set off by /,/.
Independent morphemes and almost all others except affixes (classes -Nn to
Xx- in § 4.1), occurring singly or with affixes, with /./, /?/, f!/, and other
intonations: Yes.; Why?; No I; Come !21; John!; English.; Here.
HIDATSA

5.1. A particularly brief sketch will be given for Hidatsa, which is of interest
here because its structure is very different from that of English. For the most
part, Hidatsa consists of morphemes which are not in themselves nouns, verbs,
etc., but which combine with affixes of nominal, verbal, or other meaning.
Most morphemes of Hidatsa may be grouped into the following classes on
the basis of substitutability:

S: stems, which occur with any affixes or with no affix (or zero), and next to
other stems: ika' 'look' in ika'c 'he looks', ika's 'watcher', ika'Pi's 'the
one who always watches', ikako·wiha·k 'finishing to look'; kO'wi 'end',
kO'wic 'it is the end', kO'wihe'c 'he finished'.
P: prefixes, which occur before almost any stem and with each other. There
are special selections and relative order among them, as also among the
suffixes: ki- 'suus' in ki-ka'k 'looking at their own'; aru- 'place or object,
future' in aruPika 'something to look at'.
Pr: a group of mutually exclusive personal prefixes: w- '1', r- 'you', i- (or zero,
etc.) 'he', in wiru-hic '1 stand up', riru'hiPi 'do you stand up', iru'hic 'he
stands up'.
Inst: about 70 stems occur in most cases only with instrumental prefixes:
-saki- 'split' in pasakic 'he split with a stick', rusakic 'he split with the
hand', kasakic 'he split by pounding'.

60

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

Pinst: about 6 prefixes which occur only with Inst stems: see above.
U: utterance-final suffixes which occur at the end of (as well as within)
stretches of speech: -c 'it is', vowel repetition '?': wahkuc 'he is here'
wahkuPu 'is he here?'.
F: clause-final suffixes which can be substituted for U if the utterance continues: -k '-ing', -wa 'when' in wurusiak 'we arriving, .. .', wuPusirawa
'when we arrived' (cp. wurusi'rac 'we arrived'). In the equations below,
F will be taken to include U, since no statements are needed for F that
do not apply also to U.
N: non-clause-final suffixes. Some of these are final in the stress-group (word)
and others are not, but none of them normally occur at the end of a sequence of words such as have U or F at their end: -s 'naming suffix' in
wa·rahtu·Pas 'the skulls'; -se 'by', -ara 'several' in a·tarase 'by their
several houses'.
Post: a few postpositive morphemes which occur after word-final affixes
(sometimes at the end of an utterance): isa 'again' in wa'hacisa 'we go
again'.
Ind: a very few stems which occur with no affixes, as calls or whole utterances:
ho' 'yes', riskare 'friend'.
S.2. We proceed to state what sequences of morphemes can be substituted
for single morphemes of the classes named above.

Sl Sl =S2: ris'i 'dance' and hiri 'make' in waPo'ris'ihirak 'making a dance'
(0' is nominalizing prefix, member of P).
Pinst Inst=S2: we can substitute rusaki 'split by hand' for aciwi 'follow' in
wa-c 'I did-'.
Pr S2=S3: wa 'I'+aciwi 'follow'; wi 'I' or i 'he' + ru-hi 'stand up'.
P S 3= S 3: hiru 'bone', aruhiru 'skeleton'. There is considerable limitation of
selection for individual members of P and for sub-classes.
S3 S3=S3: ika' for ikako'wi in-c (see under Sin § 5.1). Substitution of
Pr S2 and PS 3 from the preceding equation for S3 permits sequences
like P Sl P Sl =S3, or Pr Sl P Pr Sl as in wahku-ciwa'wa'ha'Pac 'we
want to get': wah- '1st person', kU'ci 'get', wa'- 'something' (a prefix of the
second stem), wa·· 'lst person', he' 'want', -aPa 'severally, i.e. plural', -c
'verbalizer' .
S3 N=S4: ikahke' 'he caused to look', substitutable for ika' in wiPika'c 'he
looked at me', wiPikahke'c 'he makes me look'. Substitution from the preceding equations gives us results like this: S3 S3 N=S\PS 3 PS 3 N=S4;
see the example in the equation above, where the -aPa plural applies to
both stems with their prefixes. Here too there are some individual
members and sub-classes of N which have restricted distribution.

FROM MORPHEME TO UTTERANCE

61

S4 S4 F=S4 F: we can substitute araxe'xak 'holding' or ika'k 'looking' or

ika'c 'he looked' for ixpase araxe'xak 'holding by the wing' (ixpa 'wing',
-se 'by').22
S4 S4 U = S4 F S4 U = S4 U: haruk kara'k re'ware'c 'thereupon running
he went, they say' 23 can be replaced in context by re'ware'c 'he went,
they say', or by re'c 'he went' alone, but not by any single morpheme.
Similarly, tahe-ruk aru?isiak hap-e'hisahic 'If he kills him it will be bad.
It will be dark.' 24 can be replaced in its context by aru?isiac 'It will be
bad'.
5.3. In terms of the classes of morpheme sequences, we can now say that
most utterances in Hidatsa, in the style of talking summarized here, consist
of S4 U (representing stretches of speech of any length), or S3 N (= S4
representing usually a single stress-unit, e.g. a person's name uttered by
itself), or Ind (again a single word occurring as an utterance with its separate
intonation). Post occurs in several positions in S U utterances, and we may
say that its syntactic value within the S U formula is zero: Post S U = S U
Post=S U.
DISCUSSION

6.0. Having sketched how our procedure could be applied in two languages,
we may now ask what kind of description it has given us. The following sections attempt an interpretation of the linguistic status of this analysis, and a
summary of the kind of results that it yields.
6.1. Position Analysis. The procedure begins by noting the environments
of each morpheme and by putting in one class all those morphemes that have
similar distributions. However, in many cases the complete adherence to morpheme-distribution classes would lead to a relatively large number of
different classes: hotel would be N, think would be V, and take would be in a
new class G since it has roughly the distribution of both hotel and think. In
order to avoid an unnecessarily large number of classes, we say that take is a
member of both Nand V. This means that we are no longer studying the
morpheme take or think. We are studying the positions, Bloomfield's
'privileges of occurnmce', common to both take and think, or those common
to both take and hotel. 25
This means that we change over from correlating each morpheme with all
its environments, to correlating selected environments (frames) with all the
morphemes that enter them. The variables are now the positions, as is shown
by the fact that the criterion for class membership is substitution. The
element which occurs in a given class position may be a morpheme which
occurs also in various other class positions. We merely select those positions

62

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

in which many morphemes occur, and in terms of which we get the most
convenient total description. 26
6.2. Stopping Point. One might ask how we can tell where to stop the
analysis. This is answered by the nature of the work. All we do is to substitute one sequence for another in a given context. When we have the
formula for English utterances with assertion intonation, we find that all we
can substitute for it is another utterance, with the same or another intonation.
When more work has been done on sentence sequences and what is called
stylistics, we may find that in certain positions within a sequence of sentences
only N V 1.1, say, ever occurs, to the exclusion of V I!/. When we have such
information, we will be able to extend the substitution procedure to sentences
and sequences of utterances (whether monologs or conversations).
6.3. Resultant Construction Formulae. The final result, for each language
which can be analyzed in this manner, takes the form of one or more sequences
of substitution classes ('utterance constructions', 'sentence types'). The
formulae tell us that these are the sequences which occur. The final formulae
therefore give us the limitations upon the freedom of occurrence of morphemes
in the language, for they imply that no sequence of morphemes occurs
except those which can be derived from the formula. 27
The utterance formulae are thus rather like the formulae for the phonetic
structure of a language, and even like phonemic writing: all of these are
formulae showing what occurs in the language. The signs used in the utterance
formulae have value: N has the values A N, TAN, T A, etc.; and each of these
has specific morphemes as values. Supplying morpheme values for the signs
of the formula will give us expressions in the language.
This is not quite the whole story, for there are further limitations of selection
among the morphemes, so that not all the sequences provided by the formulae
actually occur.28 Individual limitations of selection cannot be described in
these formulae; at best, the more important among them can be stated in
special lists or in the dictionary. Limitations applying to various groups of
morphemes in each class can, however, be included if we give our formulae
the form of charts. The second dimension which the chart provides enables
us to state selections among sub-groups in the several columns (each column
representing a position, i.e. a class), by placing along one horizontal line the
sequences of subgroups that actually occur.
6.4. The procedure outlined here could be paralleled by a series of substitutions beginning with the whole utterance and working down, instead of beginning with single morphemes and working up. In that case we would have
to find formal criteria for breaking the utterance down at successive stages.
This is essentially the difficult problem of determining the immediate
constituents of an utterance. 29 It is not clear that there exists any general

FROM MORPHEME TO UTTERANCE

63

method for successively determining the immediate constituents, when we
begin with a whole utterance and work down. In any case, it would appear
that the formation of substitution classes presents fewer theoretical difficulties if we begin with morphemes and work up.
IMPLICIT IN THE FORMULAE

7.0. We have seen the application and the interpretation of the procedure
outlined here. This is perhaps all that is required of a procedure. However,
in order to fit it into the rest of the description of a language we should find
out how much of the information which we expect from syntactic description
is derivable from this procedure.
7.1. Suprasegmenta/ Features. The intonational and other suprasegmental
features, as well as the pauses, are generally included in the equations. When
one sequence is substitutable for another in an utterance, it is understood
that the intonations, pauses, etc. of the utterance remain unchanged under
the substitution. If the substitution is associated with a change in intonation,
as in Who for John in - got lost, we state that fact. Some substitution groups
may require not only particular sequences but also particular suprasegmental
features; e.g. any English sequence with loud stress followed by reduced loud
stress may equal N (§ 4.33). The domains of suprasegmental features often
coincide with the sequences which we recognize in our substitution equations;
e.g. /,/ and slight pause separating adverbial phrases in certain positions in
English.
In general, therefore, the formulae are based not only on the sequences involved but also on the suprasegmental features of the sequences substituted and
of the utterances in which they are substituted. The formulae may thus correlate
with phonemic junctures which express the limits of suprasegmental features.
7.2. Morphologic Boundaries. The formulae also correlate with nonphonemic (structural)junctures, such as may be set up to mark the boundaries
of intervals which serve as elements of the utterance structures.
7.3. Morphologic Relations. Many of the relations between a morpheme
class and other morpheme classes, or the interval or utterance in which it
occurs, can be derived from the formulae, although they are not explicitly
stated there for their own sake. The formulae show what morpheme classes
(or sequences) are syntactically zero, like Xx- prefixes and -Aa suffixes in
English (§ 4.31); we can even learn from them that in English most prefixes,
but relatively few suffixes, are syntactically zero.
The formulae show which morpheme classes occur by themselves in utterances, and which classes are bound not to other morpheme classes (as are
most affixes) but to constructions, i.e. to sequences of classes: e.g. English &

64

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

is limited to any class or extant class sequence; English T is bound to a
following noun phrase as a sort of phrase prefix (§ 4.33); Hidatsa suffixes
operate on the whole preceding word, whereas prefixes operate usually only
on the immediately following stem (§ 5.2). The fact that English - Vv suffixes
(-etl) are best added not to Vi (verb morphemes) but to V 3 (verb phrases
including object, etc.), shows that -ed may be regarded as a suffix of the whole
verb phrase. In general, a class may be considered as bound to the level
indicated by the number with which it is associated; i.e. it is bound to
whatever is substitutable for the symbol-and-number combination that
accompanies it in the equations.
We can also learn from the formulae which morpheme classes are the
heads and which are the closures of the sequences in which they appear: the
closure is the class which always appears last; and the head is the class
which can always substitute for the sequence, e.g. an N morpheme for an
N-phrase sequence. The formulae can thus show which sequences are
endocentric (e.g. A N=N) and which are exocentric (e.g. T A=N).
It goes without saying that adequate information about the morpheme
classes can be derived not from sketchy examples of the equational procedure
such as we have given, but from detailed analyses of all the mutually
substitutable sequences of the language.
7.4. Order. The formulae are devised in part on the basis of the order of
classes in each sequence, and can therefore be used to show it explicitly or by
means of the raised numberings.
7.5. Always or Sometimes. They also enable us to indicate if certain classes
occur always or only sometimes in a given sequence. If we write D A = A and
A N = N, and are free to apply or not to apply the results of one equation in
the other, then we can derive from these equations the fact that N, A N, and
DAN all occur.
7.6. Selection. Some of the features of selection, the restrictions on particular morphemes which occur only with particular other morphemes, are
indicated in these formulae, or derivable from them. Some selection, such as
that between I and am as against he and is, is included in the list of variant
forms of the morphemes. Selections of concord are listed as special domains
of the morpheme in question (§ 2.3 above).
We can also consider selections and order among sub-classes, e.g. the fact
that certain Hidatsa stems are always the last stem in the word, or that ought
alone among English preverbs usually has to after it. This can be expressed by
the formulae if they are allowed to become more complicated in form, and
especially if they are made into two-dimensional diagrams. Lastly, the
formulae in themselves are statements of selection, saying for instance that
N V sequences occur, but not NT.

FROM MORPHEME TO UTTERANCE

65

7.7 Meaning. The formulae can be used as a source of information on the
grammatical meaning of the morpheme classes symbolized in them. To do
this, it is necessary to say that morpheme classes or class sequences which
replace each other in various equations, i.e. which occur in identical morpheme-class environments, have similar functions or grammatical meanings.
Thus the N 3 of N 3 N 4 Vd4 (§ 4.35) is shown to replace the N 4 which is
otherwise found after Vd ; both of these represent the object of the Yd'
7.8. Comparability of Language Structures. The nature and number of the
morpheme classes that have to be set up for a particular language, the forms
and number of the equations, and the number of levels which have to be
differentiated by raised figures for some of the class symbols, all permit comparisons between the descriptions of one language and another. Such comparisons must not be made too lightly, since considerable choice remains in
the setting up of equations for any language. In particular, there may be room
for ingenuity in keeping the raised numbers of certain symbols - say N, V,
S - at a minimum for each language; so that of two sets of equations for a
language, one might reach up to N 8 while the other does not go beyond N 4 •
Undoubtedly, the procedures of setting up equations and assigning the raised
numbers can be made more explicit and, if desired, standardized for greater
convenience in structural comparative research. An analysis of this type for
Moroccan Arabic comes out rather similar to the English, ending up with
N S V 3 and N 4 N 4 for the former as against N 4 V4 for the latter, while the
Hidatsa equations are very different, ending with S4 U. This fits in with the
general similarity between Indo-European and Semitic structure as against
Siouan. 3o
7.9. Testing Morphological Cruces. In § 6.1 it was seen that the values of
the symbols in the equations are not morphemes but positions, indicating
whatever morphemes occupy these positions (irrespective of what other positions these morphemes may occupy in other equations). Therefore, when we
wish to know the analysis of a particular utterance, it is impossible merely to
replace each morpheme by its class symbol (e.g. I know it=N 4 VI N 4 =
N 4 VI) since many morphemes may be members of several classes. W. F.
Twaddell has suggested 31 that such analyses of utterances be carried out by
repeated substitution tests on the basis of the equations, in what he termed
'experimental substitution at all levels'. To carry this out, we would ask what
substitutions are permitted by the equations for each morpheme or morpheme sequence of our utterance, in the class environment which it has in
that utterance. This is repeated until we know unambiguously to what class
each occurrence of each morpheme in our utterance belongs.
We take, for example, the utterance She made him a good husband because
she made him a good wife. We know that there is a difference in meaning

66

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMA TIONAL LINGUISTICS

between the two occurrences of made; and since we know this without any
outside information beyond hearing the sentence, it follows that indication
of the difference, in meaning and in construction, can be derived from the
structure of the utterance. We proceed to analyze the utterance, going
backward along the equations as far as may be necessary to reveal this
difference. First, we know that the utterance is an instance of N 4 V 4 &
N 4 V 4 =N 4 V 4. At this stage the two halves of the sentence are still identical
in structure. Each V 4 has the structure V 2 (make) N 4 (him) N 4 (a good
husband/wife) + - Vv (-ed). The equations show the two cases of this sequence
(§ 4.34): vj N 4 N 4 = Ve2 (make Harding President) and vl N 4 N 4 = Ve3
(make my husband a party). We cannot tell which of these applies to each of
our V\ or whether both go back to the same one, because make is equally a
member of Vd and lj.32 We find, however (§ 4.34), that Vd2 N 4 N{= vl N14 Pc
N 4 (where the subscript number merely identifies the N which has different
positions in the two sequences). We try now to discover whether either V 4
in our utterance has the structure vl N 4 N 4, by applying to each V 4 the
substitution which is possible for vl N 4 N 4 • To do this we interchange the
two instances of N 4 and insert between them an instance of Pc. In the first V 4
we get a meaningless utterance which would practically never occur: she
made a good husband (Nt)for (PJ him (N) in place of she made him (N) a good
husband (Nt). ]n the second V4, however, the substitution gives us an
equivalent and not unusual utterance: she made a good wife (Nt)for (PJ him
(N) in place of she made him (N) a good wife (Nt). Clearly, then, the second
V 4 in our utterance is analyzable into
N 4 N 4 + -Vv =
+ -Vv. Since the
first V 4 can not be analyzed in this way, it can equal only the one remaining
V N N construction, namely vj N 4 N4+_VV= Ve2+-Vv.33
We have thus found that the two halves of the original utterance are
formally different in the substitutions which can be performed upon them.
The whole analysis could of course have begun with morphemes. We could
have assigned class symbols to each morpheme, and upon reaching the two
occurrences of made would not have known whether to indicate each of them
by Vd , VI' or anyone of several other symbols. We would then have had to
decide the question by carrying out on the N N following them the very
substitutions attempted above.

vi

v;

EXCLUDED FROM THE FORMULAE

8.0. Having seen what syntactic facts can be derived from the formulae, we
now ask which ones cannot be included in them and must be found by
separate investigations and expressed in separate statements.
8.1. The great bulk of selection features, especially those that distinguish

FROM MORPHEME TO UTTERANCE

67

between individual morphemes, cannot be expressed except by very unwieldy
formulae. Although it may be of theoretical interest to know that two-dimensional diagrams of such detailed selections are conceivable, in practice this
information can only be given in lists and statements appended to the
formulae.
8.2. This is true also of such relations among morphemes as the families of
mutually replacing English suffixes, e.g. -id, -or in squalid: squalor, candid:
candor, etc. 34
8.3. The formulae also cannot in themselves indicate what meanings may
be associated with the various positions or classes.
Thus, in Hidatsa, of two formally equivalent words (with noun suffixes)
before the clause-final word (which ends in a verbalizing F), the first will
normally indicate the subject and the second the object: ruwac'iri istacu
rux'iak 'one of them his eye opening (when one of them opened his eye)'.
Such information about the meaning of positions and constructions have to
be given in separate statements accompanying the formulae. 3a
8.4. The formulae will also fail to give information about the complete distribution of anyone morpheme, which may occur in various classes (§ 3.4),
or about the frequency of morphemes or classes, or about the phonemic
structure of various classes (e.g. the fact that Hidatsa F or various English
affixes are unstressed).
9. We have seen that by extending the term substitution class from single
morphemes to sequences of morphemes, we arrive at formulae equating
various sequences which are substitutable for each other in all or certain
utterances of the language in question. We have seen further that when the
setting up of equations is continued until no new results are forthcoming, we
obtain succinct statements for the sequences of morphemes which constitute
the utterances of the language. The procedure of constructing these equations
has here been investigated in order to see what syntactic information it gives
or fails to give.
It is clear that the usefulness of this procedure will vary from language to
language, the more so in view of the fact that many languages (e.g. to some
extent Hidatsa) reveal comparatively little difference between the structure
of all utterances and the structure of minimum utterances, and in view of the
fact that some languages have great freedom in the distribution of minimum
utterances within all utterances.
NOTES
1 I am indebted to Rulon S. Wells for several valuable discussions of this paper, and to
C. F. Voegelin and Bernard Bloch for helpful criticisms. In view of the fact that methods

68

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

as mathematical as the one proposed here have not yet become accepted in linguistics,
some apology is due for introducing this procedure. However, the advantage which may
be gained in explicitness, and in comparability of morphologies, may offset the trouble of
manipulating the symbols of this procedure. Furthermore, the proposed method does not
involve new operations of analysis. It merely reduces to writing the techniques of substitution which every linguist uses as he works over his material. One works more efficiently
when one thinks with pencil and paper.
2 And, of course, phonemic constituents of suprasegmental 'morphemes' (if we wish to
call them that), e.g. stress, intonations, and pauses.
3 The conditions may be phonemic or morphological.
4 In effect, such a treatment of concord takes some of the features of selection, e.g. the
fact that all nouns in the Hebrew phrase agree as to the article, and puts these facts into
the phonemic form of the repeated morpheme. As a result, not only the physical recurrence
of a repeated phoneme, but also its special position (e.g. before every noun of the phrase),
is now given when we describe that morpheme. Such treatment permits a simpler syntactic
statement, because the information about the recurrence of the repeated morpheme would
otherwise have to be given somewhere in the course of the syntactic description. The
syntactic equations to be offered below will suffice to describe what morphemes occur together and in what order, but will not be able to describe conveniently the agreements
among the morphemes in a sequence. To do so would require various devices; e.g. instead
of writing NN (N for noun), we would have to write something like ,.,.N ,.,.N, meaning that
we can have either NN or haN haN but not haNN. Hence it is preferable to get as much
of this information out of the way as possible before we attack the sequences. Not only
the obvious cases of repeated morphemes but also more complicated types of agreement
can be stated as being merely the special forms of particular morphemes. For further
discussion of this treatment of repeated morphemes as single morphemes, see Lg. 21 (1945),
121-7. (Paper 3 of this volume.)
5 If poem and house are placed in one class N, overlooking the difference in their distribution, then write and, say, wire (I'm wiring a whole house this time) would be placed
together in a class V since the distributional difference between them corresponds to that
between poem and house. We would then obtain a statement connecting Nand V. If we
kept poem and house in separate classes, and write and wire in separate classes, we would
obtain two statements, one connecting write and poem, and another connecting wire and
house. These two statements together would equal the one statement about Nand V.
6 The criterion which decides for -ing, and against un-, as the relevant environment in
determining substitution classes is therefore a criterion of usefulness throughout the
grammar, a configurational consideration. It will be seen below that the classes defined
on the basis of -ing can be replaced by certain sequences of classes, which is not the case
for any .classes based on the un- environment. Special statements will have to be made
later about the selection of un-, which in part will run across the boundaries of the classes
set up on the basis of -ing, etc.
7 With variant -ren plus vowel change for plural -so
8 This would give us a class V including cover, note, find, think, and a class N including
cover, note,find, child. It would permit individual morphemes to be members of more than
one class. Alternatively, we could put cover, note, find into a class G, think into V. child
into N. Then each morpheme could only belong to one class, and morphemes having wider
distributions, or having the distributions of two classes, would find themselves in a new
class. Bernard Bloch uses yet another solution in his analysis of Japanese. He would regard
the noun cover, which occurs in positions of N, and the verb cover, which occurs in positions of V, as two independent morphemes whose homonymy is syntactically irrelevant.
That is, he uses class membership as a necessary condition for morpheme identity. Any of
these methods of classification can be followed rigorously, and may be advantageous for
particular purposes. Anyone of them can be used in the method discussed below without
affecting the final result.
D Such substitutions as certainly for know John can be precluded by analyzing the utterance

FROM MORPHEME TO UTTERANCE

69

into immediate constituents. However, the analysis into immediate constituents requires
a technique different from that used in this paper, a technique based on comparing the
apparent structures of utterances and parts of utterances. In this paper, on the other hand,
we seek to arrive at a description of the structure of an utterance, without having any
prior way of inspecting these structures or of saying whether two utterances are equivalent
in structure. Therefore, the analysis into immediate constituents is not used here, and we
must state other methods of excluding such substitutions as certainly for know John.
10 This does not mean that every member of the class occurs in all the positions in which
any other member occurs (note 5). A particular morpheme may occur in several classes
(note 8). Some morphemes occur in two or more classes in the list below; cf. class-cleavage
in Leonard Bloomfield, Language, New York 1933,204. The statement of the environments
of each morpheme class given here is far from complete, and is merely sufficient to identify
the class.
11 In such expressions as the one I saw, a good one.
12 If subdivisions are not recognized here they will have to be dealt with as special types
of selection (§ 7.6).
13 We may include have and be in R in some environments, e.g. in relation to not: have
not taken parallel to will not take as against don't get going. Note that when do, have, or
be have -ing after them they are in the position of V, not of R.
14 There are special utterances like the here and now, but in general these limitations hold.
15 For the remaining morpheme classes of this type, the analogous statement of environment will not be made, since the class mark (-Na, Na-, etc.) is sufficient indication.
16 This is true only within the broad limits of what utterances frequently occur in the
culture. There are also limitations when man is preceded by an adjective A (e.g. young
man). There would then be two adjectives, the A of good boy, and the A of young man,
which together should yield young good boy (A A N = A N = N). The conditions under
which the twp adjectives would occur next to each other in this way are mentioned in
§ 4.32.
17 The standard procedure being as follows: since D A = A permits us to substitute D A
for A wherever A appears, we write D A in place of the first A in this very equation: if
D A=A, thenDDA=A, i.e. DDA=DA=A.
18 We determine that it is A2 rather than Al in this equation by testing whether peculiar
(AI) can be replaced by older, oldish (A2). In constructing all these equations we may use
either of two working procedures. One is to obtain a large amount of data, including many
sequences which have the same environment as Nl; we may then sort out, from among
these, those sequences which consist of A followed by N, and see whether the A is always
Al or also sometimes A2: e.g. we see whether among the sequences having the same
environment as senator we have not only peculiar fellow but also older fellow. The other
procedure is to set up equations as working hypotheses, on the basis of whatever data we
have, and then try various substitutions for each symbol in our equations, until we discover
which symbols are mutually substitutable. Thus on the basis of He's a peculiar fellow we
may write tentatively A Nl = Nl. Then we would test to see if A is Al or A2 by seeing if
we can substitute older for peculiar and still get an English utterance. The two procedures
are, of course, epistemologically equivalent.
19 See George L. Trager and Bernard Bloch, 'The Syllabic Phonemes of English', Lg. 17
(1941), 228.
20 When we have the stress pattern '" the medially-stressed morpheme is in class D:
pretty young is D A in She's a pretty young girl to be out this time of night. It parallels very
young in He's a very young fellow. The addition of emphasis stress, and other changes in
the environment, complicate these stress statements. Exact statements will be necessary,
however, since various morphemes (e.g. first) occur in both A and D.
21 V! can substitute for N Yin many utterances: Come into the house! for He came into
the house. Therefore V! can be considered as equalling N V, with the morphemic intonation ! substituting syntactically for N. This cannot be done for N I, since the stretch of
speech immediately following N 1has the complete intonation of an independent minimum

70

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

utterance: John, why don't you come! Therefore N! too must be taken as an independent
minimum utterance.
22 The position of this phrase in the sentence may be seen in II 5, p. 205, of R. H. Lowie,
Z. Harris, and C. F. Voegelin, Hidatsa Texts (Indian Historical Society, Prehistory Research Series 1.6), May 1939, from which volume most of the Hidatsa examples given here
have been taken. The analysis in §§ 5.1-3 is tentative.
23 Ibid., II 31, p. 207.
24 Ibid., 149, p. 195.
25 This is also done, in essence, by Bloomfield's class cleavage (Language, 204), and by
his functions of form classes (ibid., 196), which in essence provide for the syntactic equivalence of words and sequences of words (phrases). Needless to say, the whole procedure
described here owes much to Bloomfield's method.
26 It may be necessary to point out that this positional analysis is strictly formal, as
compared with form-and-meaning analyses like the one in Otto Jespersen's Analytic
Syntax, Copenhagen 1937.
27 Of course, from the formula N V we derive many sequences that occur: e.g. TAN V
(The old order changeth) since TAN =N, and so on.
28 Some of these limitations can be included by giving the signs more than one alternative
value depending on the value of the other signs, somewhat as phonemic letters are given
various allophonic values. We could say that after N4, English V4 has two values: simple
V4, and V4 N4. The utterance sequence N V could represent both N V and N V N (see
§ 4.4). The more limitations of selection we wish to indicate by these equations, the more
raised numbers we may need. This may not always be the case; but if we wished for
example to indicate which noun stems occur with which -Nn suffixes we would require a
long list of equations, involving several numerically differentiated resultant N's, before
the first N1 -Nn = N1 equation of § 4.3.
29 Bloomfield, Language, ch. 13. Note also Kenneth L. Pike, 'Taxemes and Immediate
Constituents', Lg. 19 (1943), 65-82, and the method of analysis used for Japanese by
Bloch, 'Studies in Colloquial Japanese II', Lg. 22 (1946),200-48.
30 Cf. also a comparable brief analysis of Kota in Lg. 21 (1945), 283-9, based on the data
supplied in M. B. Emeneau, Kota Texts, Part I, Berkeley and Los Angeles 1944.
In a private communication.
All members of VI are also members of Va: Va are verbs which occur before N, VI are
verbs which occur before N N (as well as before N). Cf. § 4.1.
33 We can check this by noting that if in the first V4 we substitute a verb which is not a
member of Vj, we get a sequence which hardly ever occurs, and whose meaning is not
changed by the substitution of N4 Pc N4: She bought him a good husband would not differ
in meaning (if it occurred) from She bought a good husband for him. But if we try another
member of VI, for instance think, we find again that the substitution gives a 'meaningless'
(non-occurring) utterance, or in any case one with a greatly altered meaning: She thought
him a good husband as against She thought a good husbandfor him. Verbs in V, are therefore
verbs which involve obvious change in meaning when the N1 Pc N substitution is imposed
upon them; verbs not in V, do not involve any reportable change in meaning under that
substitution. Therefore the made in made him a good husband functions as a member of VJ.
34 Such families of morphemes came to my notice in Stanley Newman's and Morris
Swadesh's material on English.
35 See, for example, Edward Sapir, Language, New York 1921, 86ff.
31

32

5

STRUCTURAL RESTATEMENTS: I

The series of papers of which this is the first will attempt to restate in
summary fashion the grammatical structures of a number of American Indian
languages. The languages to be treated are those presented in Harry Hoijer
and others, Linguistic Structures of Native America, New York 1946,1 These
restatements are not based on new field work, but on the contributions in
this volume and on the chief published treatments of the languages in
question, as well as on limited manuscript material. While the other publications and manuscript material have been consulted for additional details
and for purposes of checking results, the chief basis for each restatement is
the corresponding contribution in LSNA (to which the reader is referred
throughout), since a major purpose in the present series is comparability
with these contributions.
The justification for this series is therefore not the presentation of new
data, but the testing and exploring of statements of morphological structure.
The statements in this series will differ from those in LSNA partly in the use
of somewhat different techniques and compact formulations, but chiefly in
being restricted to the distributional relations among the elements of the
language. The present restriction to distributional relations carries no
implication of the irrelevance or inutility of other relations of the linguistic
elements, in particular their meanings. Information concerning the meanings
is not derivable from the distributional statements, and is clearly necessary
for any utilization of the language. However, because of the differences
between the distributional relations and such other relations as those of
meaning and phonemic similarity, and because of the independence of each
type of relation in respect to the other types, it becomes desirable to examine
each type of relation separately.
SW ADESH' ESKIM0 2

1. Morpheme Alternants and Morphophonemes 3

A great deal of the complexity of Eskimo grammar derives from the fact
International Journal of American Linguistics 13, No. I (1947),47-58.

71

72

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

that many morphemes have variant phonemic forms in various environments. 4 Some of these phonemic differences among the alternants of
particular morphemes can be expressed by regular phonological statements.
E.g. when a (suffix) morpheme beginning with two consonants follows in
close juncture after a morpheme ending in a consonant, the suffix has an
alternant lacking the first of the two consonants (Swadesh, 33-4); this fits in
with the fact of phonemic distribution that consonants occur in clusters of
one or two and no more. 5
In the case of other morphemes, the alternation among their positional
variants can be expressed compactly with the aid of morphophonemic
symbols. E.g. certain morphemes containing the phoneme i in many environments have alternants with a instead ofi when a vowel follows. Swadesh
(33) writes the i in these morphemes as I, while the i in other morphemes
(which do not have this and other alternations characteristic of i) is not
specially marked. 6 Of the many suffixes, certain ones have correspondingly
different alternants in correspondingly different environments; Swadesh (32)
marks each such group of suffixes with a particular morphophonemic
juncture, and offers compact statements of the phonemic alternations which
occur in the environment of each such juncture.
The alternations of one group of stems in various environments do not
correspond to the alternations of other groups of stems in those environments
(e.g. tiklqforefinger has the variant tikiy before -it plural, while alIq harpoon
line has the variant ayI before -it). Kleinschmidt, Barnum, and Thalbitzer
discuss this under the heading of various 'classes' of stems, and deal with it
in those sections of the grammar in which they indicate the suffixes with
which these stems occur. Since these stems, however, do not differ in the
suffixes with which they occur but only in the phonemic alternations of their
variants, the information concerning their differences (i.e. concerning their
variants) can be given (as is done by Swadesh) at the point where phonemic
variations within morphemes is treated. 7
Various groups of suffixes also have special variants in particular environments. For example, after the Nd group of morphemes (demonstrative
sub-group of nouns) the various C morphemes (case-endings) have variants
different from those which they have after other N morphemes: inuJ1nut to
people, isuanut to its end, but qa~uJ1a to the south, a~uJ1a to the north;
qaqqamitfrom the mountain, u~laamitfrom morning, but qa~aJ1J1afrom the
south, a~aJ1J1a from the north. 8
Among the alternations of morphemes in different environments we may
also consider the varying and repeated forms of the number and case
morphemes, and the various forms of the person morphemes, after these
morphemes are separated out in section 3 below.

STRUCTURAL RESTATEMENTS: I

73

2. Morpheme Classes
P: particles, not occurring with any of the non-initial morphemes listed

below (except in one specially noted case), and in most cases having each
by itself the phonemic characteristics of a word. These may be subdivided as follows:
P,.: frequently occurring alone as a whole utterance: aak yes.
Pb : occurring usually as utterance introducers: imaqa imagine! ....
Pc: occurring usually before words containing M. (verbs with subordinate
mood suffixes) and before words containing Cr (relative case): nauk
although. For greater detail, this group could be further subdivided,
since various members of Pc occur before particular members of Ms.
Pd : occurring chiefly before words containingMv: imannat so many, qaJ1a when?
Pe: a sub-group of Pd which also occurs with a suffix following it, the suffix
being -nit/rom, as against, a member of Co (plus plural): itsaq years ago
(member of Pd), itsay-nit as compared with years ago.
tak-: an emphatic morpheme prefixed occasionally to Snd morphemes.
S: stems, occurring initially in the word, with non-initial (suffix) morphemes
following within the word. In some cases these suffixes are zero and we
may say that the stem constitutes the whole word. Various sub-groups of
S may be distinguished according to the particular suffixes which sometimes occur directly after them.
Svi: intransitive verb stems, which sometimes occur directly before Q,.
suffixes, but never immediately before Qb suffixes: au to rot.
Svt: transitive verb stems, which sometimes occur immediately before Qb
suffixes, but never immediately before Q,.: tuqut to kill. Sv will be used to
indicate both Svi and Sw
S",: stems which occur both in Svi or Svt positions and in Sn positions.
Sn: nominal stems, which sometimes occur immediately before Qc or C
suffixes: iylu house.
Snd: demonstratives, occurring directly before C suffixes (which in this
position have special variants), but not before Qc; and occurring occasionally after tak-: ma- here.
Sn;: interrogatives and some other pronouns, occurring before C and -t
plural, but not before Qc: kik- who?
Snr: stems which always occur with Qc; there are various sub-groups, one of
which always occurs with Cr : kisi alone.
Snp: personal pronoun stems which occur only with particular ones of Qc:
u~a- occurs only with -na J; ili~- only with -t (i~lit thou).
Sn,,: numerals, entering into special sequences with each other. Except for
atausiq one, these never occur without either the dual or the plural suffix

74

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

following them, and have two plural suffixes: sisamatfour, sisamaitfour
groups.
T: non-initial morphemes, which always follow a member of S or another T;
one group follows C. Those Twhich occur after SVi will be marked with a
vi subscript. Those Twhich occur after no S other than Sn will be marked
with subscript n; and so on. Each T morpheme is thus marked with a
subscript indicating after what group of S it occurs. Each T will also
be provided with a second subscript, to indicate whether it is ever followed
immediately by Qa (in which case it would be similar to Svi), or by Qb
(thus being similar to Svt), or by Qc or C (which would be similar to Sn).
Tvn will then indicate a T morpheme which sometimes occurs directly
after Su, and sometimes occurs directly before Qc or C morphemes 9;
occasionally, of course, this Tvn will occur before or after other T morphemes, in which position its specific Tvn status could not be determined
without additional data about the other environments in which it occurs.
The subscript x will be used to indicate vi' vt, and n equally: Txn thus
marks a morpheme which occurs occasionally after Sui' Svt, or Sn (as well
as after T), and which is sometimes followed by Qc or C, but never by
Qa or by Qb' Furthermore, the first subscript of each T also indicates
which sub-groups of T it occurs directly after : Tvn does not follow T
morphemes whose second subscript is v' but only those whose second
subscript is n (or x' if the last subscript before x is n). The following subgroups of T may be noted: Tnn (never directly after Sv, nor directly before
Qa or Qb), T xn , T vn , Tvv (never directly after Sn nor directly before Qc or
C), Txv (after anything, but never directly before Qe or C), Tvn, Txx
(followed by whatever would follow the predecessor of Txx; e.g. Sn Txx
could be followed by Tnv or Qc, while Sv Txx could be followed by Tvv or
Qa), T vtvi (never after Svi or Sn, nor before Qb or Qc), T xvi , Txvt , Tev (only
after C and before Mv)'
M: The modal morphemes in this group are merely a special case of the Tv
morphemes. They are listed separately only because they are the last of
any sequence of T, and because every Qa or Qb has a member of Mv
preceding it, though it may have no other T in the word.
M vi : the last Tvv;, always present before Qa: -~u- intransitive.
M vt : the last T vvt , always present before Qb: -~a- transitive.
Mvs: those Mv (whether Mvl or M vt ), after which the members of Qb containing recurrent ('fourth') person sometimes occur: -ya- because,
when ....
Mn: a small group of 'participial' Tvn which occur only directly before C or
Qc (but directly after Sv or any T whose second subscript is v): -niabstract nominalizer.

STRUCTURAL RESTATEMENTS: I

75

C: case-endings, occurring directly after Sn and after every Mn, and after
every sequence of T morphemes (excluding Tev) if the last subscript in the
sequence is n,l0 In particular:
Ca: absolutive, which has grammatical concord as to plural with Qa in the
following word (within the utterance). This morpheme has many alternants, among them -q (unnuaq night), -k (inuk man), zero (iylu house).
C r : relative, which has grammatical concord as to plural with Qe in the
following word (within the utterance). This morpheme is -p (iylup of the
house).
Co: the other (adverbial or local) members of C: -mi in, -mitfrom, -mut to,
-kut through, -mik by means of, -tut like.
D: dual (-k) and plural (-t) morphemes, which occur, within the word, in the
position of Cr and Ca: iyluk two houses, iylut houses.
Qa: personal ('subject') pronouns which occur after M vi : -q he did, he does
(lists in Kleinschmidt, 19-20 Table 2 under 'ohne sufi'.'; Thalbitzer, 1033;
Barnum, 117-20).
Qb: personal ('subject-object') pronouns which occur after M vt : -aa he ...
him (lists in Kleinschmidt, 19-20 Table 2; Thalbitzer, 1034; Barnum,
123).
Qe: personal ('possessive') pronouns which occur directly after S", or after
every sequence of T or M the last subscript in which is n: -ya my (lists in
Kleinschmidt, 19-20, Table 1; Thalbitzer, 1021-2; Barnum, 19).
E: enclitics, occurring, within the word, after all the morpheme classes listed
above: -Iu and.
3. Morphemic Components

The further analysis of the structure can be facilitated by a breakdown of
Qa' Qb' and Qe into morphemic components. Whereas each member of
these classes, say -tik of you two (Qe), has been considered as a single whole
morpheme, it is possible to consider it now as a combination of morphemic
components. In the case of -tik, these components would be Ca, dual, and
second person. In order to admit this breakdown in the present analysis, it
will have to be based not on meaning but on distribution. l l This distributional
differentiation, however, will be not in respect to the rest of the word (since
all members of Qc are identical in distribution in respect to the rest of the
word in which they occur), but in respect to other members of Qa' Qb, Qc and
D in other words.
Since the positions of Co and Cr have been defined, we notice that some
members of Qe are substitutable for Ca (the whole utterance remaining
otherwise unchanged), and as many other members are substitutable for
Cr. On this basis we say that half the members of Qc contain Ca (e.g. -ya my

76

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

in iylu-ya my house), while the other half contain C, (e.g. -rna my, of my in
iylu-ma of my house).
Two or more words containing C (some of which may begin with S., others
with Snd) may occur in sequence; the last of these may contain Qc and the
others not: uqautsit makkua tusayka~it words, these, thy-heard-ones. In such
cases it is noticed that if the first words contain the plural suffix, only certain
members of Qc occur in the last word; if the first words contain the dual
suffix, only certain other members of Qc occur in the last word; and if the first
words contain no D suffix, again only particular members of Qc occur in the
last word. On this basis, we divide Qc into three parallel groups, the members
of the first group containing the plural of the preceding S, the members of
the second containing the dual, and the members of the third containing
neither. The grammatical agreement among the words in the sequence is then
expressed by saying that the plural morpheme does not occur in each word
independently, but occurs over all the words in the sequence at once. I.e. in
this environment the plural and the dual are discontinuous morphemes,
suffixed to the sequence as a whole; if the plural occurs here, its phonemic
form consists of sections which are appended to each word in the sequence.
Similarly, the member of C appended to each word in the sequence is the
same (in the example above, the first two words have C, and the Qc of the
last word contains C,). The C morphemes are therefore discontinuous in this
environment in the same way as the D morphemes.
In other cases, we have a sequence of two words, the first containing C,
and the second any C (not necessarily Cr ), which may be included in Qc:
umiap suyua of the boat, its front. Here we notice that if the first word lacks
the plural suffix, only certain members of Qc occur in the second word; and
if the first has the plural, certain other Qc occur in the second. This division
of Qc is not the same as in the paragraph above. Hence we can redivide Qc
along a new criterion: those which contain the plural of the preceding C, and
those which contain the singular of the preceding Cr. In accordance with the
last paragraph, both -i his ... s and -it their ... s (both are Qc containing Co)
contain the plural of their preceding S and agree with the plural of the other
Co words in the sequence, while -a his one and -at their one (also Qc containing Co) do not contain the plural of their S and agree with the lack of
plural in the other Co words of that sequence. 12 In terms of the present
paragraph, both -it their ... s and -at their one contain the plural of their own
person agreeing with the plural of the Cr word which comes before in the
sequence, while -i his ... s and -a his one do not contain the plural, again in
agreement with the Cr word.
In a similar way, we find differences of distribution and an agreement
between members of Qc which occur in sequences with morphemes meaning

STRUCTURAL RESTATEMENTS: I

77

I, those occurring with morphemes meaning thou, those occurring with Sn
words or morphemes meaning he (she), and those occurring in a special
subset ofthe positions of the last members mentioned. IS The Qc thus contain
elements agreeing with person.
When a word contains Qc but no Co, we can now analyze each Qc as
containing the following components: either Ca or Cr ; either singular or dual
or plural of the S-part of the word to which the Qc is suffixed; first, second,
or third (or, in some positions, fourth) person (as possessor of the S-part);
and singular, dual, or plural of the person. In words which contain Co after
the Qc (e.g. nuna-~ti-nitfrom our land) only half the Qc members occur. I.e.
the Qc are not differentiated as to Ca and Cr in this case, and we may say that
they do not contain Ca or Cr : the Co which follows the Qc replaces the Ca or
Cr which is contained in the Qc when there is no Co following.14
The members of Qa can also be considered as combinations of morphemic
components. In a sequence consisting of word with Ca and word with Qa'
only half of Qa occur if the Ca lacks plural suffix, while the other half occur
if the Ca has the plural: inu-k pisuy-pu-q the man went, inu-it pisuy-pu-t the
men, they went. Similarly, particular Qa occur according to the person of the
Ca word. IS We therefore analyze each Qa into a person component and a
number component.
We now note the limitations of Qb in respect to sequences consisting of
word with Cr plus word with Ca plus word with Qb' If D follows the Cr we
find only particular Qa morphemes occurring, the rest occurring if D does
not follow Cr. There is a similar subgrouping of the Qb morphemes in
agreement with the presence or absence of D morphemes after Ca. This subgrouping, however, criss-crosses with sub-grouping in agreement with D
after Cr. Finally, it is also possible to obtain separate sub-groupings of Qb
in agreement with the person of the C,-containing word and in agreement
with the person of the Ca containing word. On the basis of all this we consider each Qb as a combination of four components: person ('subject'); its
number; another person ('object'); the number of this other person.
The various agreements as to D noted in the last few paragraphs can be
expressed by saying that in the sequence environments 16 -Cr ... -CR ... ,
-Ca ... -MUiR ... , -Cr··· -MutR ... R, and -Ca ... -MutRR ... the D morphemes are
discontinuous, being composed of sections one of which occurs in each
position within the sequence (if the D morpheme occurs in that sequence).
The many Qa, Qb and Qc morphemes have now been reduced distributionally to various combinations of four R components and the previously
recognized D, Ca, and Cr,17 There is gain rather than loss in considering the
person references of Qa and Qc' and the double references of Qb, as being all
the same elements R rather than different possessive, subject, object, etc.,

78

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

pronouns. It is characteristic of Eskimo that not only are these pronouns
different in meaning from English subject, object, etc., but they also do not
differ in meaning from each other except in ways related to the difference in
their positions. The R of Qa, and to a lesser extent of Qb, are often phonemically identical or similar to the corresponding R of Qc' The third person
singular member of Qa has in many environments the variant -q, identical
with the Ca suffix. From the point of view of English, tikipputit (Sv MVi R)
can be translated thy arrival (as though it were Sn Ca R) or thou arrivest;
tikippuq (also Sv MVi R) can be translated arrival (as though it were Sn Ca)
or he arrives.
Various special distributional limitations can be conveniently stated in
terms of these components. For example, the two R in a Qb morpheme are
never the same. We do not have a given person as both 'subject' and 'object'
in a Qb; English he stabs himself would be translated in the same way as he is
stabbed or (someone) stabs him, i.e. kapi~uq (Sv MVi R). The first three persons
of R have much the same distribution. The fourth or recurrent, meaning he
himself or his own, occurs almost only 18 in -C ... (-C) -MvR3 and -Mvs(Ra) ...
-MvR 3(Ra)'

In a similar but much simpler analysis, the negative-modal morphemes
(ThaI bitzer, 1036-45) can be broken down into combinations of a negative
component (member of Tvv and occurring last before M) plus the previously
recognized M morphemes.

4. Equivalence of Morpheme Sequences

A compact description of the structure of utterances in terms of the morpheme classes can be obtained if we equate every morpheme class or sequence
of morpheme classes to any other sequence which substitutes for it within
the utterance.
We begin with the classes Sv and Sn and their equivalents.
Sn = N 1. This and the next equation are merely a change of symbols so as not
to confuse the syntactic status of N and V sequences with the specific
morpheme classes Sn and Sv' Sn includes all the subgroups of Sm within
the distributional limitations noted in § 2 above.
Sv= VI.
Sn Tnn = N 1. The sequence of Sn and Tnn can be substituted for Sn (i.e. the

sequence occurs in the same utterance positions and word positions as
does Sn). Since the Sn of this equation can itself be the resultant of
Sn Tnn=N 1 (since Sn=N 1), this equation permits a whole series of Tnn
after an initial Sn'
S", T"'n=N 1 •

STRUCTURAL RESTATEMENTS: I

79

S" T"n=N 1 •
S" T",,= V 1 • E.g. tuqut kill (Svt), tuqutsi kill-things (Svt TI/t"I= V/).
Sx Tx,,=Vl.
Sn Tnv= Vi. E.g. iylu-qaq have a house, substitutable for tikip arrive.
N T;xx=N. E.g. iylu-inaq only a house.
VTxx=V.
tak- S~d=S;d' S;d is included in Sn above.

When N or V are not substitutable for all the preceding N or V, they are
given a higher raised numeral than the ones for which they do not substitute.
V Mn=N 2 • To this N 2 we can no longer add, say, T nn , since Tnn is added only
to N 1 •
2
N C Tcv= V 2 • A raised numeral on the left hand side of the equation

represents itself and all lower numerals.
V 2 M,,=Vl.
V 2 M"s= Val.
N 2 R=N 3 •
N 3 (Snd) N l =N 3 • When C is added here it is added as one discontinuous

suffix to each word in this sequence.
N 3 C, N l =N 3.
N 3 Co N 3 = N 3 • This is reported to be rare.
V.3 (N,3) N; N=N. See below.

Pc

v.= v..

N 3 Co=Pd•
Pe Co=Pd•
Pd V l = V 3 •
N 3 Co V 3 = V 3.

In what follows it is noteworthy that although V sometimes occurs with
one R (Qa) and sometimes with two R (Qb)' and although the Na preceding it
sometimes agrees with and refers to the 'subject' R of the V(when it is QIJ) and
sometimes the 'object' R of the V (the second R or Qb)' we can nevertheless
make a simple distributional statement in the matter: V always has an R
agreeing as to plural and person with a preceding N IJ , and only sometimes
does it also have an R agreeing with a preceding N r •
N 3 CIJ V 3 R= V 3 R=NIJ4 V 3 • The presence of only one R indicates that the
V l =V 2 M vl '
3
N C, V 3 R NIJ4=N,4 Na4 V 3. The presence of two R (one listed after the V 3
and the other included in the NIJ4) indicates that the Vl = V 2 Mw
N 4 D=N5. If the N 4 has discontinuous parts, so has the D.
(N;) N; V/ (N,s) N; V 3 =(N,s)
V 3.

Pb utterance = utterance.

N;

80

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

Bearing in mind the fact that for each symbol henceforth used we can
carry out the substitutions permitted by the equations above, we can now say
that every utterance consists either of Pc or else of

or any single word.

5. Utterance Structure
If we consider not the particular distributional interrelations among the
morpheme classes, as expressed in § 4, but their relation to word and
utterance juncture, we find that the structure of any minimum utterance
(word) is either P or else
S (a number of T) ~ «Mn) CTcu)Mu R ~ (D)(R(D))(E)
(Mn)
C~
The order is generally as indicated, except that the separation of R, D, and C
components is not always subject to a clear ordering, and that Co morphemes occur after R(D).
All utterances are sequences of these minimum utterances within the
limitations noted in § 4.
The final statement can be varied by various alternative formulations. For
example, D could become an always-occurring rather than sometimesoccurring suffix of N 4 (i.e. of N and of R) if we added a zero singular to the
dual and plural. Conversely, R could be reduced to a sometimes-occurring
suffix of V if one of the persons, say R 3 , were regarded as automatic to V,
so that the mere occurrence of V included the occurrence of R3 unless
another R is specified. This could not be done to the second (R) in the
formula above, since all the members of this R are occasionally absent, so
that no one of them could be regarded as automatically present. In a similar
fashion, Mu and C could be reduced to sometimes-occurring classes; in the
case of C either Ca or Cr could be considered automatic with every N. All
these variations, however, would not make a considerable change in the
structural formulation.
A number of the characteristics of Eskimo as compared with other
languages appear in this statement of the distributional structure: e.g. the
large number of morphophonemic variations in phonemic environments
(especially of morpheme-boundary consonants); the long stringing of noninitial morphemes; the fact that S and either MvR or C occur in every non-P
word (and that the occurrence of one member of each of these classes

STRUCTURAL RESTATEMENTS: I

81

excludes the occurrence of any other member in that word). Other characteristics of Eskimo do not appear here: chiefly, the fact that there are very
many T morphemes; and the specific act:on or situation meanings of many
of the T (e.g. -siaq obtained, -kuluk lonely, -miu inhabitant of, -ynit to smell
of).
NEWMAN'S YAWELMANI19

1. Phonemic Composition of Morphemes

A major characteristic of Yokuts is the fact that morphemes of particular
distributional classes have very limited types of phonemic composition. For
example, all morphemes of class Vi (not including V1) consist of either 2 or 3
consonants in the odd-numbered phonemic positions, one discontinuous
vowel occupying both even-numbered phonemic positions, and the length
phoneme in one or neither of the even-numbered positions: xata eat, xaya·
place, 'ilik sing, 'a·mal help.
Even more noteworthy are the vowel changes which take place in each
morpheme when another morpheme is suffixed to it: hula$-'an he is sitting
down, hulu'$u-' he will cause to sit down, hul$-atin desire to sit down. These
vowel changes are associated with the individual suffix before which they
occur, since the same type of vowel change will occur in all morphemes when
-atin follows them. The vowel changes are not associated with the individual
morpheme in which they occur, since the morpheme (e.g. the hl$u sit down
above) has various changes, depending on which suffix follows it. We can
therefore say that each of these vowel changes is simply part of the associated
suffix, a part which extends over the preceding morpheme and which consists
not of adding phonemes to that preceding morpheme but of replacing
vowels, length, and' within it. The number of different types of vowel change
is considerably smaller than the number of different suffixes, so that there are
many cases of different suffixes beginning with the same vowel change. This
can be likened to the fact that different suffixes begin with the same phoneme;
or each type of vowel change can be considered as a morphophonemic
juncture such that each suffix occurs after one of another of these morphophonemic junctures.
A less ramified peculiarity of the phonemic composition of morphemes is
the vowel harmony of suffixes. In the case of Yokuts, this term refers to the
fact that the vowels in all suffixes (except the two morphemes comprising
Ma) are the same as the last vowel of the preceding morpheme as to mouth
position if they are the same as to height: das-hatin desire to report, 'urhatin desire to steal. This can be expressed by saying that morphemes which
contain a vowel determining or determined by vowel harmony contain in
that position not a full vowel but rather two vocalic components, height

82

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

and position, the position being a long component extending across
morpheme boundary onto the next vowel place which has identical height
component.
Aside from these characteristics, Yawelmani has few peculiarities in the
phonemic composition of morphemes. There is a reduplicating element, i.e.
one composed not of particular phonemes but of a recurrence of whatever
phonemes were contained in the preceding morpheme; this is a positional
variant of -da' repeatedly, and occurs only after two-consonant morphemes
and after three-consonant morphemes before -wiyi- do, say. There are few
discontinuous morphemes, the number of these being reduced by the fact
that the verb has no subject or object pronoun affixes and hence no agreement as to number, etc" with neighboring nouns. Lastly, it appears to be
unnecessary to recognize any zero morphemes (morphemes whose phonemic
composition is zero phonemes), since the three zero morphemes (subjective
singular, verbal noun, future) which do occur are associated each with a
characteristic (and not common) vowel change in the preceding morpheme.
We can say that these morphemes consist of the respective vowel changes and
are therefore phonemically identifiable.

2. Morpheme Alternants and Morphophonemes
Few morphemes have suppletively different positional alternants, Thus there
is _eo (with a particular vowel change in the preceding morpheme) causative
which occurs only after three-consonant VI while -a'la' (with another vowel
change) occurs after two-consonant VI, There is -' future which occurs after
morphemes ending in . while -en occurs after other morphemes, And -da'
repeatedly alternates with a variant consisting of reduplication, as noted
above.
There are very few cases of morphophonemic alternation involving
consonants. In contrast, all the different vowel changes (different as to the
vowels which are changed and as to the consonantal environment in which
the change occurs) which go to make up a single vowel change type, are
ultimately morphophonemic variants of that vowel change type. 20
3. Morpheme Classes
P: particles, not occurring in one word-structure with any other morphemes,

They may be subdivided as follows:
p.. : occurring only initially in utterances: 'ama' and, 'angi is it that ?21
Pb: occurring anywhere within the utterance: 'e'man to no avail,
Pc: between any two words of like class: yow and (yow is also a member of
p..), 'i' or.
gi interrogative, always after some word.

STRUCTURAL RESTATEMENTS: I

83

Pd : each occurring as an utterance by itself: ';,h;,m no (also in Pb ), hiyuk hello.
I: initial morphemes within word and, except for P, within utterance. This

includes the following distinct classes:
Vi: verb bases, which occur directly before Mj or other M vv , M v", and which
undergo, before these medial suffixes, the major vowel changes organized
by Newman in LSNA, 235 and Yokuts, 23-4 (as compared with the much
simpler pre-suffixal vowel changes which occur in the remaining initials
or in M).
V;: a few verb initials having the phonemic and morphophonemic characteristics of V l M, but not morphemically divisible: h;,Yle· hunt.
wiyi do, say, occurring after Q, but otherwise like a member of Vl.
Q: a group of four-, two-, and three-consonant morphemes (the first two
types never occurring except before wiyi, and the first one not reduplicated) which occur before wiyi: t'apwiyi slap.
N I: noun initials or roots, occurring sometimes before M and sometimes
directly before Fn (with or without intervening D): k'ac obsidian.
Np: personal and demonstrative nouns, occurring before Fn and before both
the dual and the plural members of D: na· I.
N;: interrogatives, occurring before the subjective and two other members of
Fn (which two varies with the particular NJ plus -uk:
N l : place names, occurring only before the -w locative member of Fn: 'alt(a)-w
Altaw; 'a· lit salt grass.
M: medial morphemes, occurring after I and before F. Sub-classes:
Mvv: occurring after VI and before Fv: atin desire to. Some of these occur only
directly after V l and are marked Mj; the others sometimes occur after
other MvvMvn: after V l or V 2 and before Fn: -n verbal noun.
Mnv: after N and before Fv: -na· procure.
Mnn: after N and before Fn :-iyin one who has, -hal plural number.
Mnpnp: a morpheme which occurs after ma·- you, a member of N p , and before
D, with the meaning and I: mak' you and I, ma'ak' you two.
Ma: two auxiliary suffixes, whose vowels are not affected by vowel harmony 22
and which occur before only 5 members of Fv: -x.,· durative.
D: two plural-dual suffixes, occurring before Fn. In particular:
dual: occurring only after N p •
plural: occurring after Nand N p •
F~: word-final suffixes which occur after V I, M vv , M,JV: -en future. Five of
these, which also occur after Ma , are marked Fa.
Fs: subordinating word-final suffixes which occur after VI, Mvv , Mvn> but
differ from Fv in that they do not usually occur in an utterance without
another word containing Fv (i.e. there are utterances with Fv words, and

84

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

utterances with Fs words and Fv words, but only rarely utterances with
Fs words alone): -e'ni in order to.
Fn: six case morphemes occurring after N: -nit ablative. 23
uk: a morpheme occurring after all Ni Fn: wa·tinuk of whom?

4. Equivalence of Morpheme Sequences
Vc~ -in= Vi. Vc~ indicates those Vi which contain only two consonants. -in

become, get to be, is a member of Mvv' This sequence (Newman's fake
base) has the ViM internal structure, but the distribution of a pure V 1 •
Next to other members of Vi, -in has the effect of any other Mvv' Compare he'xin get fat ( = Vi) and l<>gwin get pulverized ( = V 1 M).
Q wiyi= Vi.
V 1 Mi=v2.
V 2 Mvv= V 2 • This provides for more than one Mvv: xat-hatin-xas do nothing
but desire to eat, xat-hatin desire to eat.
V 2 Mvn=N.

The medials which occur with V occur with any member of V. Among the
few exceptions is -Ie' with a unique vowel change continue; it occurs with only
a few Vi, all with three consonants and no length in first vowel place:
l<>giw-Ie' keep pulverizing. In contrast, the medials which occur after N, in the
next two equations, each occur after a few particular members of N. Although
no limit is set by these equations on the number of medials which occur
together, after either V or N, there are never more than a few in a single word,
and any particular medial is not repeated.
N 1 Mnv= V 2 •
N i Mnn=N 1 •
V 2 Ma Fa= V 3 •
V2 Fv = V 3 • E.g. h;,Yle·-hin he hunted.
V 2 Fs=V/.
N; Mnpnp=N;.
N;=N 2 • This is necessary because D does not occur after N;.
N p2 D=N 2 •
N 1 plural=N 2 •
N 2 Fn=N 3 •
N, !ocative=N 3 • The locative is a member of Fn.

We now proceed to sequences of separate words.
N; Notj = N;. x indicates any member of Fn included in the N 3 ; obj indicates
the objective case member of Fn included in the N 3 : y;,l;,wc-in y;,k;,·Cj of

STRUCTURAL RESTATEMENTS: I

85

the one who is assembling the people can be replaced in its utterance by the
first word (whose Fn is possessive case) alone.
N;
indicates the possessive case member of Fn: k'ac-a min your
obsidian can be replaced in its utterance by the first word (obsidian, whose
Fn is objective case) alone.
N; N; = N;. Two nouns having the same case are in apposition and may be
replaced by a single one having that case: ta·nit pilnit from that road
(from that, from road). This can be expressed by saying that the Fn is a
discontinuous morpheme extending over one or more N. We might have
written the equations differently: N 2 N 2 =N 2 , and then N 2 Fn=N 3 as
above, where the N 2 would now represent either one N 2 or more
(depending on whether the N 2 in this last equation was a resultant of the
preceding N 2 N 2 = N 2 equation). A special case of this is the nominal
sentence: nn·cn(') be·mamguc A clever fellow - Humming Bird. (where
both N have the subjective member of Fn).
V/ Notl = v/. obi indicates any member of Fn except the subjective.
V 3 N 3 = V 3•
3 V 3 = V 3 • The last three equations, each of which is repeatable, permit
within a single utterance a number of verb clauses, each containing a
number of nouns or noun phrases in addition to its verb (excluding
subjective case nouns in V. clauses), and with all clauses but one containing V. rather than V. Yawelmani utterances apparently tend to be
short, and do not eke out all the possibilities of this structure within one
utterance. Note, for example, taxan'an kew mam bine·te·ni he is coming
here to ask you, containing V 3 , Np+the locative member of Fn , Np+the
objective member of FRO and V;. The first two words constitute a V 3
clause, and the second two a V.l clause.

N;o. =N;. po.

v.

We now consider the relation of P to utterances.
V l Mvn=P. This occurs with very few morphemes of these classes: 'ut't'al
solely.
word+gi=that word. ma'gi was it you is substitutable for ma' you in the

identical environment.
word Pc word = either word (or any word of their class). We can substitute
kayiw for kayiw ynw be'mamguc in 'ama' kayiw ynw be'mamguc pana'
hin And Coyote and Humming Bird arrived, and still have a Yawelmani
utterance.
some words of utterance + Pb + remaining words of utterance = that utterance.
Pa + utterance = that utterance.
We can now say that every utterance consists either of Pd or of N.!b (sub
for subjective member of Fn) or of V 3 •

86

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

S. Utterance Structure
If we consider the morpheme classes in relation to word and utterance
juncture, we find that the structure of any minimum utterance is either P or
else Nj Fn -uk or else /(M/) (a number of

M)~ ~~) ~ or Fs

All utterances are sequences of these minimum utterances, in almost any
order.
NOTES
1 Hereinafter abbreviated LSNA. This series originated as a review of the book. The
importance of the volume, and the opportunity which it offered for exploration into the
comparability of structural formulations, led to a change of plan whereby this series is
written as an independent restatement of the LSNA structures, while a separate review,
by W. D. Preston, appears elsewhere.
2 Morris Swadesh, 'South Greenlandic (Eskimo)', LSNA, 30-54. Sources used in addition
to Swadesh are: S. Kleinschmidt, Grammatik der griinliindischen Sprache; Berlin 1851, on
which Swadesh' own study was based; William Thalbitzer, 'Eskimo', in Franz Boas (ed.),
Handbook ofAmerican Indian Languages, Part 1 (BAE-B 40, Washington 1911), 967-1069;
Francis Barnum, Grammatical Fundamentals of the Innuit Language; Boston 1901; Franz
Boas, Eskimo Lexicon, 1883, listed as Ms 342 in C. F. Voegelin and Z. S. Harris, Index
to the Franz Boas Collection (Language Monograph, 22), 1945, and now in the Boas
Collection of the Library of the American Philosophical Society. Because of the differences in geographic dialect and in phonetic transcription among these sources, Eskimo
forms cited will in most cases be taken from Swadesh-Kleinschmidt. When other forms
are cited, they will be given in Swadesh' phonemicization.
3 The phonemes are taken as in Swadesh, 30-2. A few minor modifications seem possible,
though they may lead to a less convenient set of phonemes. It may be possible to consider
IJ (the nasal homo-organic with q) as a positional variant of q and a free variant of y in
particular forms, instead of taking it as a phoneme. The rare phoneme y, which occurs
only between u and a (in which position it is phonemically distinct from i), may perhaps
be phonemicized as a repetition of the preceding vowel plus i: puyak oxidized blubber
(contrasting with puiaq bird's crop) could be written puuiak if the sequence uu/aa + i/y
+ u/a (where / indicates or) does not occur otherwise; to date, I have noticed no case of
this sequence. None of these phonemic changes would, however, simplify the morphophonemic statements.
4 I.e. there are many cases of morphemes, often but little different from each other
phonemically, which are complementary to each other in distribution and can hence be
regarded as positional variants of one morpheme.
5 E.g. -y~uaq evil, large, after nuna land (nunay~uaq) has the variant ~uaq after uyayak
stone (uyayaysuaq). Summary formulations of such morphophonemic relations are given
by Swadesh. While similar data is given in greater detail by Thalbitzer and the others, it
is not only diffuse but is also intermingled with sub-phonemic sound alternations which
Swadesh treats as positional variants of phonemes.
6 Compare aki in aki-ya my coat, aki-a his coat, with morphophonemic nipi in nipi-ya
my voice, nipa-a his voice.
7 In giving the variants of each morpheme or group of morphemes, we state the environments in which each variant occurs. Thus, many morphemes have certain variants before
the plural suffix and before the various case suffixes (except the absolutive). Rather than
say that these case suffixes are added to the plural stem, which is undesirable since the

STRUCTURAL RESTATEMENTS: I

87

forms are plural neither in meaning nor in grammatical concord, we give both plural
suffix and case suffixes as the environment in which the prior morphemes have the variants
in question.
8 Thalbitzer, 1050 (where it is treated as a different inflection).
9 In effect, each T morpheme changes the syntactic status (i.e. the selection of final verb
or noun suffixes) of whatever precedes it to that indicated by its second subscript. Tvn
occurs only after a morpheme having verbal status, and changes it into a noun.
10 E.g. after Tvn, Tvn Tzz, etc.
H Meaning alone is in any case not adequate, since, for example, it would be hard to
assign a distinctive meaning to the Ca element.
12 Note iylua his (one) house, iyluat their (one) house, iylui his houses, iyluit their houses.
13 This last group contains the recurrent or fourth person which occurs in the positions
indicated at the end of section 3.
14 Since we describe Qc (or Qc plus Co) as containing both C and D as well as person, it
is convenient to say that even when the person (Qc) is lacking we have both C and D
present. By the side of iylu house (with Ca) and iylup 0/ the house (with Cr) we have iylut
house (with D). We can analyze iylup as containing not only D but Co D or Cr D, these
last two being identical phonemically. With the other members of C this phonemic identity
does not occur: iylumut to the house, iylunut to the houses. If we analyze iylut in this way,
Co and Cr become similar to Co in respect to D, and the forms which sometimes have Qc
suffixes always have C (instead of having the C r and Ca absent if D follows without Qc,
as it does in iylut). There is nothing morphophonologically irregular in considering that
iylut contains a zero C a or Cr, since Co is in any case zero after iylu, and the -p of iylup
would drop before a following -t (two consonants do not occur at the end of a word).
15 Plus the added conditions for the recurrent person.
16 R indicates the personal reference parts of Qa, Qc, Qb (the last containing two independent R). The ... indicate the position within the environment of the portions of D,
after the respective R or other morpheme.
17 If we could state with phonemic or morphophonemic regularity what portions of each
Q were D, C, and R, we would break each Q up into these successive morphemes. This is
indeed possible for various members of Q in various Eskimo dialects. However, since a
statement of the phonemic variants of each component, in the environment of each Q,
would be very complicated and irregular, it seems best to list the Q as morphemes, by
and large, and to carry out a componental breakdown only for grammatical analysis.
18 Parentheses indicate that the enclosed element sometimes occurs in this environment,
but not always. R3 indicates the third person member of R. The a subscript of R is only
to indicate that the two R so treated are identical.
19 Stanley S. Newman, 'The Yawelmani Dialect of Yokuts', LSNA, 222-48; Stanley Newman, Yokuts Language o/California, New York 1944.
20 The vowel changes which are included under a single type appear identical only after
Newman's configurational analysis. Without benefit of this analysis they would appear
to differ as between bases (VI) having different phonemic composition, and particularly
as between bases and 'themes' (initials other than VI, or sequences of any initial plus
medials). For this reason, the setting up of Newman's stem types (types of vowel changes)
is a compact morphophonemic organization.
21 This could be divided into two morphemes, an introductory 'an (in Pa) plus the interrogative gi which is noted below.
22 This can be expressed by saying that a semi-open morphophonemic juncture occurs
before Ma (across which the long vowel components do not extend, as they do not extend
across open word juncture), or by saying that the vowel places of Ma are occupied not by
the distance vowel components (which extend in vowel harmony) but by whole vowels.
23 These are the subjective and 5 oblique cases. The subjective consists of -i after the
plural morpheme and of a particular vowel change (with zero additive suffix) otherwise.
The 5 oblique cases all begin with identical vowel changes, but it does not seem useful to
recognize this vowel change as a general oblique morpheme, since there is perhaps only

88

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

one (syntactic or morphological) distribution which these 5 have as against the subjective
and which we could say is the special distribution of the general oblique morpheme
(Va 3 Nob/ = Va3. There is, of course, a disadvantage in recognizing the general oblique
morpheme, since we would then have to specify a special limitation of distribution applying
between it and the 5 specific oblique cases.

6

STRUCTURAL RESTATEMENTS: II

1. FROM PHONEME TO MORPHEME
Since the present Restatements l , of which this one is concerned with
Voegelin's Delaware 2, are limited to the morphologies of the languages
under consideration, we assume that we have given all the requisite utterances
in phonemic representation. Each utterance is for us a sequence (or combination) of phonemes. Within each utterance we now separate off small
sequences of phonemes one from the other. We may say that between each
such small sequence and its neighbors a morpheme boundary is placed; and
we may call the sequence which lies between two such boundaries a morphemic segment. The placing of the morpheme boundaries is thus an
operation carried out on the phonemes of an utterance.
In general we may consider the placing of morpheme boundaries to be
carried out in the usual way, by comparing various utterances which are
identical in part of their phonemic sequence. If we compare nse'TU'n my lip
with wse'TU'n his lip, we would place a morpheme boundary after the first
phoneme: n my, w his, se'Tu'n lip. When such comparisons are carried out
for a large corpus, we obtain morphemic segments which are repeated in
various environments throughout the corpus (as se'TU'n is repeated here).
1.1. In several cases in Delaware the placing of morphemic boundaries is
not as simple as in the example above. If we compare maxke'w it is red with
maxke'k that which is red (§ 4.3)3, we might separate off w it is and k that
which is. However, since maxke' does not occur by itself, we can consider
maxke'w as a single morphemic segment, and say (in § 3 below) that all
morphemes ending in w have alternants without the w when they occur
before k that which.
1.2. The morphemic segment need not be an additive sequence of phonemes. If we compare entaw;}le-l~ntank when he is glad with we-le-l~ntank
one who is glad (§ 4.9), we would separate off enta when and (- VI +e·)4 one
who. We have here a morpheme which consists not only of an (added) phoneme but also of an associated subtraction of a phoneme.
International Journal 0/ American Linguistics 13, No.3 (1947), 175-86.

89

90

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

1.3. The sequence of phonemes which is separated off as a morphemic
segment is in some cases not continuous. The sequence ;}li indeed occurs only
in the environment (§ 5.9-12) 5
1/2p. +i'lu' +(pl.)ll/2p.-Verb + n + (pI.)
all with one stress: ki'lu'wakt;}lilu'si'ne'Yo you fellows indeed are burning.
This environment also occurs less frequently without ;}li. The two subsequences separated by the vertical bar also occur independently of each
other: ki·lu·wa you fellows, al;}mi'Ki'n she began to grow indeed; in the latter
case only n indeed occurs (also with third person prefix), without ;}li. In
considering the morphemic segmentation of all these utterances, we seek to
satisfy the following conditions: first, ;}li is not an independent phonemic
sequence but occurs only in the neighborhood of n (and the rest of the
environment above); second, the n which occurs here in the absence of ;}li
is identical with the n which occurs in the presence of ;}li. 6 If we are prepared
to say that the presence of ;}li varies freely (from the point of view of descriptive linguistics) with its absence in the above environment, we can set up
a single morphemic segment ;}li ... n and identify it (in § 3 below) as a free
variant ofn. If we wish to distinguish the cases in which ;}li occurs from those
in which it does not, we can satisfy our two conditions by setting up ;}li ... n
as a positional variant of n. In order to differentiate the environment in
which the ;}Ii ... n variant occurs from that in which n occurs by itself, we
would then have to set up a zero morpheme * which indicates the occurrence
of the elaborated form. Then in the environment 1st p. +i·ju· + 1st p. + Verbthe variant of the n morpheme would be n; and in the environment 1st
p.+i·lu·+lst p.+*+Verb - the variant of the n morpheme would be
;}li ... n.7
1.4. Structurally more important cases of discontinuous morphemes may
be found in what is often called grammatical agreement. In the sequence
seen above
person i·lu· (pI.) person Verb (pI.)
the personal prefix is the same in both positions, and the plural is either
present or absent in both of its positions at once. The occurrence of a
particular personal prefix in one of the positions is thus dependent upon its
occurrence in the other. We can express this by setting up discontinuous
morphemes, e.g. k ... k you, which, when they occur in these environments,
occupy both positions at once.
Another environment in which the person and plural morphemes have
repeated phonemic forms is (§ 5.8)
person Verb (pI.)

person haKay (pI.)

STRUCTURAL RESTATEMENTS: II

91

as in k:mihihi'w;)na khaKayena we killed ourselves. We may segment this
utterance into the following morphemes
person Verb (pI.) haKay
with the understanding that person and plural morphemes are discontinuous
in this environment, their repeated parts occurring around haKay.
A more complicated environment of the discontinuous person morpheme
is (§ 6.20)
person maNI·h object person Verb n
as in n;)maNI'ha t;)lisenkhin I made him lie down. Here it is the object of
maNi·h and the subject of the verb that agree. We separate off the following
morphemes:
person maNi·h object Verb n
and state that in this environment the object morpheme contains two phonemic parts, one appended to maNi·h as object and the other to the following
verb (as formal SUbject).
1.5. A somewhat different case of a phonemic sequence whose occurrence
depends upon the occurrence of some other sequence is that of i·w negative.
It occurs. only in the environment: negative particles + person + verb +
- ( + plural). The negative particle position is filled by one of a small class of
morphemes: ku' not, kaci don't, or (if other particles precede) mata not
(§ 5.4). Since the i·w is not independent, we may say that it is simply part of
the negative morphemic segments: ku' ... i·w, etc. The environment of these
discontinuous morphemes is now - + person + verb ( + pl.), and the fact that
all morphemes of this class have a discontinuous phonemic part ... i·w is
worth noting under the phonemic constitution of morphemes but does not
otherwise affect the morphological statements. After certain imperative
suffixes the discontinuous portion is not ... i·w but something else; these
other sequences would be listed in § 2 below as positional variants of the
forms with discontinuous ... i·w.
1.6. Various possibilities may be seen in the setting up of the preterite
morpheme. After nouns (§ 3.11; including the plural of the possessor, if
present), and participles (verb- VI +e'; including the plural of the subject,
if present; and usually including the suffix gpan momentaneous § 5.6), and
after a few verbs there occasionally occur the following suffixes: a preterite
(singular) 8 and inka preterite plural if the personal prefix (possessor or
SUbject) is 1st or 2nd person; inka preterite undifferentiated as to number if the
prefix is 3rd person. We could divide the first inka into the same a preterite

92

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

as in the singular, plus ink plural. The same sequence inka after 3rd person
prefix would then have to be morphemicized differently: we could not segment it into ink plural + a preterite, but only into ink undifferentiated number
+ a preterite, or else into a single inka segment. There is of course no point
in merely deciding one way or another. The morphemic segmentation of an
utterance becomes unsystematic and subjective if individual choices can be
made at various points. This arbitrariness can be avoided if the segmentation
of each utterance results only from the carrying out of stated operations of
grouping upon the phonemes of the utterance. If these stated operations do
not provide a unique segmentation in some particular utterance, as in the
case of inka after 3rd person, we may leave the phonemic sequence unsegmented, with a statement of the problem; or we may explicitly add to our
original set of stated operations an additional one the application of which
(throughout our corpus) will provide a unique segmentation of the phonemic sequence in question.
1.7. There are also other problems of alternative segmentations. If we
consider the inanimate transitive suffixes m::ln, ::lm::ln, am::ln, Tam::ln, ntam::ln
it seems possible to separate off a segment m::ln. However, it is not clear
what could be done with the remaining portions, and what descriptive
advantage could result from the segmentation.
Another problem is that of the partial dependence of the person-pluralizing
suffix on the personal affixes. The personal affixes occur whether a plural
suffix follows or not, but (except for certain nouns which occur without
personal affixes) we find the plural suffix occurring only in environments
which contain a personal affix. This partial dependence could be stated
without being further integrated in the structure. Alternatively, a zero
singular could be defined, so that person and number-of-person would each
become classes of morphemes some member of which is present with almost
every noun or verb; this has some support in the fact that absence of plural
morpheme indicates singular (not merely unspecified number).

2. MORPHEMIC COMPONENTS
Although the setting up of morphemes begins as an expression of the
regularities of the occurrence of phonemes within utterances (i.e. an expression of the restrictions upon randomness of their occurrence), we are
sometimes led to morphemes having zero or very diverse phonemic constitution. This happens when there are certain differing phonemic sequences
which have partially similar or intertwined restrictions on occurrence: most
simply, if A is subject both to the restrictions upon B and also to the restrictions upon C, we may redefine A as being not a simple morpheme but a

STRUCTURAL RESTATEMENTS: II

93

combination of two morphemic components B' and C' (alternants of Band
C, or members of the same classes as B and C). This is done without regard
to the phonemes of A: whether the phonemes can indeed be divided into
two parts, and whether the parts are similar to Band C. Such analysis is
sometimes convenient in the case of paradigmatic interrelations of morphemes 9 , or in the case of incomplete paradigmatic sets of affixes like the
imperative or speaker-addressee systems of Delaware which are discussed
below.
The speaker-addressee system consists of the following morphemes: a·n I,
enk we exclusive, ankw we inclusive (I and YOu), an you sg., e·kw you pl.
(§ 4.4). In other Delaware forms, person and plural are indicated by separate
morphemes. If we try to extract a plural morphemic component from the
above group we might select the kw and k, leaving a·n and en to be alternants
of the 1 morpheme, and an and e· alternants of the you morpheme.
The imperative affixes, which include person and number of adressee and
of object, present a more complex picture. They are: Tam 1st person addressee
(i.e. let's-), I (i·I after animate transitive verbs) 2nd person sg. addressee, kw
(i·kw after an.tr.) 2nd person pl. addressee (u· if object is him), i·ne·n us (1st
person plural object, necessarily after an.tr.verbs), zero me, -i·I him. For
example: ne·yo·Tom let's see him, mHi·l give thou me, ne·wi·kw see ye me,
ne·yu· see ye him, ne·wi·ne·n see liS, ne·w see thou him (§ 4.2). In the case of
inanimate transitives ending in am~lll, the ;m is replaced by a instead of 1, by
u· before kw, and by u· ... u·kw before Tam. We now attempt to define each
of these morphemes as some combination of underlying component morphemes, the underlying ones being so selected as to have a more regular
distribution than the above morphemes have. There are various ways in
which these underlying morphemes can be selected. Two considerations
which affect the choice are: first, that it would be convenient to have a morpheme imperative which would underlie all of the above 10; second, that in
each singular-plural pair the sg. be marked by lack of the pI. morpheme rather
than by a special sg. morpheme. l l One set of underlying morphemes would
therefore be: 1 imperative (alternants: i·l after animate intransitive; the I is
lacking before all person or number suffixes except zero); Tam 1st person
addressee (undifferentiated as to number); zero 2nd person addressee; kw
plural of addressee (occurs only after 2nd person, since there is no 3rd person
addressee; alternants: u· after him, zero after ne·n); zero me (lst person
object); -i· (dropping of i·, together with an automatic dropping of the
following 1) him; ne·n plural (occurs only after me). We thus obtain an
imperative suffix which occurs (sometimes with zero alternant) in every
imperative form, and several person and plural suffixes which are taken as
alternants of the other person and plural morphemes.

94

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

3. MORPHEME ALTERNANTS
Once the utterances have been morphemically divided, we can take the
resulting morphemic segments, and consider any number of them which are
complementary to each other as alternants of a single morpheme. 12 A large
part of Delaware morphology can be simplified by listing in advance all the
sets of morphemic segments which alternate with each other in stated
environments. Each set of positional variants can be considered thereafter
as a single morpheme. We do not thereby evade the stating of these variations,
but we sever the discussion of these private alternations among members of a
complementary set from the discussion of the external relations of the whole
set with other sets - relations which are not affected by which member of the
set is present in any particular case.
3.1. Many of the sets of complementary alternants are given by Voegelin
in his section 2 (Phonology, pp. 137-42: 'Morpheme Alternants in Prefixation and Suffixation'). Other such sets may be extracted from the morphology. In most cases, the phonemic similarity among the members of
these additional sets will be less than in the sets included in Voegelin's
phonology. Nevertheless, the members of each set are complementary to
each other in environment, so that the relations among the members can be
treated separately from the (morphological) relations among the resulting
sets.
The major sets of complementary morphemic segments are in the personal
affixes, the plural, the stem forms, and the transitive-intransitive suffixes.
Before considering these, we may note a number of smaller sets of morphemic alternants.
The ~li ... n indeed of § 1.3 above would have to be listed as a free (or
positional) variant of n indeed.
The repeated-phoneme forms of personal and plural affixes in § 1.4 above
would be listed as alternants of the contiguous-phoneme forms (k ... k alternant of k), the alternation taking place in the domains exemplified by the
environments in § 1.4 above.
The various negative particles (as also the various final phonemes which
replace ... j·w) may be considered alternants of a single negative morpheme
to the extent that the environments in which one occurs are explicitly
different from those in which the others occur (see § 1.5 above).
The morpheme Ke intransitivizer (§ 6.18) has an alternant zero before the
t variant of W:J he, and the ak variant of n~ I.
The following morphemic segments, all indicating diminutive can be
considered alternants of each other, each occurring in the stated environments (§ 6.37,39): T:Jt after nouns, Ti after modal prefixes and the imperative

STRUCTURAL RESTATEMENTS: II

95

suffix, TU after verbs without these (alternatively: TU after the prefixed and
'inverse' alternants of the personal affixes).
3.2. The many Delaware plurals can be grouped together into a few
morphemes. We consider first the plurals of subject or possessor affixes.
ALTERNANT

ak
mo
e'Yo
wa'w
e'n
na'n
hti·
kw-forms
kw
u

ENVIRONMENT

animate intransitive morpheme+w variant ofw:l he (§ 3.5, 12)
animate morphemes + k:l you (§ 3.8)
inanimate transitive morpheme+b or W:l (§ 3.9); n indeed+
k:l or W:l
other occurrences of the prefixed alternants of b or W:l
inan. trans. morpheme+n:l lor k:l you (§ 3.4); n indeed+n:l
or k:l
other occurrences of the prefixed alternants of n:l or k:l
suffixed to variant of W:l he (§ 4.7, 10)
en I and an you suffixed variants of n:l, b respectively (§ 4.4)
imperative morpheme + zero you (addressee § 4.2)
same + ( - i) him morpheme (§ 4.2).

To this may be added the plurals which follow the inanimate intransitive:
ni'ske'w it is dirty, ni'ske'Yo they are dirty. These are complementary to the
above (which do not occur with inan. intr.). We can say that these are plurals
of the verb proper (there being no person affix); or we can say that there is a
zero affix indefinite (3rd) person which these suffixes pluralize.
a
u·l

inan. intr. ending in w (§ 4.3)
inan. intr. ending in t.

We now consider the plurals of nouns and of the object (goal) suffixes of
transitive verbs.
a
ak

ink
hti'
i·k
ne'n

inanimate nouns; inan. tr. verbs (§ 3.10)
animate nouns (§ 3.12: if n:l or k:l present, or if obviative suffix absent); agentive s suffix (§ 4.10); an. tr. morpheme of verbs (except
when subject prefix is W:l)
before a preterite after 11:l, k:l (§ 3.11)
after participle prefix (- VI +e·)+the ti variant of the (§ 4.10)
after the participle prefix+the other possessor-subject suffixes
(§ 4.10.1)
after imperative suffix + zero 1sf person object (§ 4.2).

The morphemic segments in the first list cannot be grouped into fewer than
two morphemes, because e'n, na'n are not entirely complementary to ak,

96

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

mo, e'Yo, wa·w. True, the former occur after n;) I(n~+na'n we exclusive) and
the latter after w~ he, but both occur after k~ you: kQ+na'n you and I (1st
person plural inclusive); k~+wa'w youfellows. We can consider e'n, na'n to
be alternants of wa'w, etc., in the environment in which they arecomplementary (i.e. after nQ), and a separate morpheme in the environments in which
they contrast with wa'w (i.e. after b). If we do this, we will be adhering
closely to the environmentally determined basis of morphemic definition:
morphemes contrast only in respect to environments, and identical phonemic
sequences (even with identical meanings) may thus come out as morphemically different in different environments. The wa'w after kQ and W;) and its
aIternant na'n after n;) would constitute the plural morpheme; the na'n after
b would be a separate morpheme and 1. Alternatively, we could consider
na'n to be the same morpheme and I (i.e. plus a member of the first person)
after n~ and k;), and wa'w to be another morpheme plural (i.e. plus a member
or members of the same person) after k;) and wa. If we first recognize na'n and
wa'w as different morphemes after b, and then ask to which of these morphemes we should assign the na'n that occurs after n;), we have two choices.
We could assign it to the na'n morpheme because of phonemic identity; or
we could assign it to the wa'w morpheme so as to complete its distribution
(otherwise the wa'w plural would occur only after 2nd and 3rd person and
not after 1st). Meaning cannot affect this decision. The meaning of na'n in
n;) + na'n we exclusive can be taken as identical with the meaning of na'n in
b+na'n we inclusive or with that ofwa'w in WQ+wa'w they: we can translate n;) + na'n as I and others of the first person (i.e. two or more people who
are first person in respect to this utterance), or else as I and others of the same
person. 13 The linguistic reflection of the meaning consideration would be how
the morphemes occur in longer linguistic contexts. However, there would
probably be no contextual preference for assigning the na'n of nQ + na'n to
na'n as against to wa·w.
The kw-forms mentioned in the first list would have to be variously
assigned: the kw of e'kw you pl. as alternant of wa'w, the kw of ankw you
and I as altemant of na'n, and the k of enk we exclusive as altemant of the
na'n of n;)+na'n (§ 2 above).
The kw and u' after the imperative I (d) suffix are alternants of wa'w (§ 2
above).
The object and noun plurals of the third list above have to be recognized
as constituting a morpheme distinct from the subject plural of the first list.
This is unavoidable because of such sequences as SUbject-person + verb +
object-person + plural,14 If there are no plurals or two plurals there would be
no uncertainty, but when there is one plural it would have to be indicated
which person is pluralized. Similarly in person (possessor)+noun+plural,

STR UCTURAL REST A TEMENTS: II

97

we would have no indication of whether this was the plural of the person or
the plural of the noun.
The plural of the second list is complementary to both subject and object
plurals, since it occurs with inanimate intransitive verbs, with which no
subject occurs. We may consider it an alternant of the subject plural wa'w,
occurring when the subject of the verb is zero. Alternatively, we could
consider it an altern ant of the object plural. This would be on the analog of
the noun, for the object plural occurs with nouns whether they have a
possessor (subject) personal prefix or not. The latter case, of noun without
possessor prefix could be compared to inanimate intransitive verbs which
have no subject prefix.
We are thus left with but a few morphemes: and I (na'n), subject-plural,
object-plural. The ink of W;) ... inka (§ 1.6 above) might be added as a
morpheme of this class indicating unstated number. There are a number of
other environments in Delaware in which number is not differentiated, and
perhaps these might be considered to include (zero) alternants of the same
morpheme (cf. § 3.5, 10, 13; 4.2, 3, 4, 6, 7).
3.3. There are several systems of personal affixes in Delaware. One is
prefixed n;) I, k;) you, W;) 3rd person (alternant: suffixed w after the an. intr.
morpheme), luwa the other one (obviative, suffixed as subject only to the an.
intr. morpheme). These occur as possessor prefixes of nouns, and as subject
(n;), k;) also as object) of verbs. Another set is the suffixed a'n I (en before k
plural, ak finally in an. tr. verbs), an you (e' before kw plural, at finally in an.
tr. verbs), t him (k after ;)kw by him and after verbs ending in a consonant), Ii
the other one. These last occur only when modal particles (enta when, etc.)
are prefixed to the verb. A third set occurs only after the imperative morpheme (§ 2 above): Tam 1st person, zero thou, zero me, -i' him. A fourth set
occurs as the second personal affix (in some cases subject, in others object)
by the side of the first two sets: i me, ;)lu by me, a'w him, ;)kw by him, a the
other (as object, or after 3rd person + noun).
The first three sets can be considered as alternants of each other for the
most part, although a distinction has to be made between object and subject
occurrences (Tam and zero both indicate 1st person after imperative, but
constitute different morphemes). The problem becomes more complex when
we seek to state the relation between the fourth set and the first two. In terms
of meaning we could say that the first two sets are in general neither subject
nor object but rather indicate the involvement of a particular person; the
morpheme of the fourth set is then explicitly object or subject and indicates
implicitly whether the morpheme of the other set is subject or object. Thus:
kU'lha:li you keep me, kU'lha:-l;)1 you are kept by me, I keep you (;)1 variant
of ;)lu). However, in terms of distribution, we find that not all combinations

98

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

occur. For example, :)lu by me occurs only after b you, not after w:) he. It
appears that only as many combinations occur as would indicate all subjectobject relations among the persons (I-you, I-him, you-me, etc., together with
he-the other one). Therefore if we consider our elements to be the persons and
the subject-object relation, we will have unrestricted distribution for our new
elements. It then appears that there is a simple connection between these new
elements and the limitation upon distribution of the original morphemes
(:)lu, etc.). When a verb contains morphemes from both the first and fourth
sets, they are restricted as follows: the precedence of the two persons involved
agrees with the relative precedence of second-first-third-other person. E.g.
if a verb includes 2nd and 3rd persons, irrespective of which is subject, the
2nd person will come first in the word (see the example above). The first
morpheme is always taken from the first set (prefixes), and the second
morpheme from the fourth set (suffixes). As a result, the 2nd person is
always the prefix b, whether it indicates subject or object. The 1st person is i
(object) or :)lu (subject) when 2nd person is present in the verb; otherwise
the 1st person takes precedence and is marked by n:), whether subject or
object, leaving the 3rd person to take second place as aw (object) or :)kw
(subject). Thus we have k:) ... :)lu I-you, k:) ... i you-me, k:) ... :)kw he-you,
k:) ... aw you-him, etc. Essentially the same arrangement obtains when the
second set of original morphemes occurs in place of the first (i.e. when modal
particles precede the verb). These combine with the fourth set in the same
way that their first-set alternants did, although they are suffixed after the
fourth set instead of being prefixed: entaw:)lahaHe·kw when youfellows kept
me, entaw:)lahal~le·kw when I kept youfellows.
The third (imperative) set, which does not combine with the other three,
also contains, although incompletely, person and subject-object distinctions.
Given the morphemes and the rules of combination stated above, we can
now establish a bi-unique correspondence between Delaware words and our
person and object elements 15, 1, 2, 3, 4 16 , G. Thus nu·lhaJa I keep him is
I +verb+3G (a variant of a·w), while 3+ IG for the same verb would be
nu·lhal:)kw he keeps me.
The same G could be used to distinguish subject-plural (P) from objectplural (GP): nu·lhalku·k they keep me is 3 (which is :)kw, here ku, when after
n:)+P (ak, here ·k, after ~kw)+ IG (n:); ku·lhalku·na·nak they keep us is
3 (:)kw)+P (ak)+2G (k:) + and I G (na·n).l7
It should be noted that the new elements 1, 2, 3, 4, G (with P and pi from
§ 3.2 above) do not merely represent a meaning analysis of the affixes. They
can be used as morphemes, each a particular set of alternants selected from
among the alternants of the original morphemes. Thus 1 has the following
alternants: n:) when there is 3G or no person+G and no modal particle,

STR UCTURAL RESTATEMENTS: II

99

:llu if there is 2G, Tam after imperative, en before P after modals, ak finally
after an.tr.+modals, a'n otherwise after modals, i before GlS if the other
person is 2 or modal + 3, n:} before G if the other person is 3 without modal,
zero after imperative. 2 is simpler: zero after imperative, e' before P + modals,
at finally after an. tr. + modals, an otherwise after modals, k:} otherwise (all
this without regard to what other person if any is present, and to whether G
follows, i.e. whether the 2 is object or not). The listing of alternants of 1, 2,3,
4, G, P, P' can be given in a much more organized fashion by presenting them
as the result of the operation of the rules stated above (relative order 2134,
etc.).
3.4. Characteristically for Algonquian, Delaware verb stems V and
instrumentals I (which follow verb stems) occur with various suffixes:
inanimate intransitive, animate intransitive, inanimate transitive, and animate transitive (§ 6.11-32). Each V or I occurs with at most one out of each
of these four groups of suffixes: nihi kill with an. tr. I in nnihila I killed him
(a is variant of a'w), and with inan. tr. tU'n in nni-tu'n (ni· variant of nihi) I
killed it; but maxkfind with an. tr. aw in maxkaw find him, and with inan. tr.
amgn in n:}maxkamgn I found it. Since all the inan. tr. morphemes are thus
complementary to each other in the V or I which precede them, we can
consider them all as alternants of one morpheme. There are usually several
V or I that occur with a particular pair of alternants such as I and tU'n
above. We may mark each such set of V or I as a particular sub-class of V or
I, and say, for example, that the I altern ant of the an. tr. morpheme and the
tU'n altern ant of the inan. tr. occur after the V 1 sub-class ofV. However some
members of these alternant pairs are also members of other alternant pairs.
For example pi'l clean and other V occur before tU'n inan. fr. in mpi·IHu·n
I cleaned it, but before han. tr. in mpi·!i·ha I cleaned him. We may call these
V2, and say that the alternant of an. tr. after V 1 is I and after V2 is h, while
the alternant of inan. tr. after V 1,2 is tu·n.
In this manner we obtain an. intr. si (and su), and inan. intr. te', after
certain V. The an. intr. has alternants e' after Va; i after Vb. 19 The an. tr. has
alternants I after Vc,6 h after Vd; suw after Ve; aw after Vg , Ie; W after Vh'
I b, e; m after Va, b, Ig; zero after Ia,d,r. The inan. tr. morpheme has alternants
tU'n after Vb,c,d; TU'n after Ve; Tam:ln after Vr ; ntam:}n after Va, Ig; am:}n
after Vg, Ib,c,d; m:}n after Vh' I.,r; gmgn after I a •
3.5. There are also a number of alternants of the stems themselves. When
a stem, or the an. intr. morpheme following a stem, ends in a vowel, it has an
aIternant with a different final vowel when w he (altern ant of w:} after an.
intr.) or luwa the other follows (§ 6.1-10).
Some stems have alternants with reduplicated initial syllable when they are
followed by ma habituative (§ 5.7).

100

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

There are some 'non-initial' stems for body-parts which occur only with
some other stem immediately preceding (§ 6.41). It may be possible to
consider these as alternants of the ordinary 'initial' stems for the same body
parts. This may be relatively simple where the phonemes are much the same:
xkan bone, i· kane in nca' ki· kaneho I tapped him on the bone. Where this is not
the case, such alternation can be based only on the analog of the above:
nmixk my hand, but i·l;mce in nbsi'};mce'na I washed his hands with my own
hands. 2o These stems with two alternants would then occur in both initial and
non-initial positions. It may even be possible to consider the instrumentals
I (short non-initial stems indicating by body-part or by activity) as alternants
of particular initial stems.

4. MORPHEME CLASSES
The following morpheme classes may be noted in Delaware for the purposes
of the structural statements to be given below. 21
F:
F 1:
F 2:
N:
N 2:
V:
V 2:
I:
R:
G:
P:
M:
Q:
Nv :

Particles which do not occur with other stems (§ 6.43).
Particles which occur as first of two stems.
Particles which occur only as second of two stems.
Noun stems (§ 6.42).
Stems which occur only after a preceding noun stem.
Verb stems.
Stems which occur only after a preceding verb stem (§6.41, 44).
Instrumentals, a sub-class of V2, but occurring rarely after V 2
(§ 6.29, 40).
Person affixes I, 2, 3, 4.
Object (goal) component.
Plural suffixes.
Modal prefixes: enta when, e·li while, etc. (§ 4.4).
Negative prefixes and particles, except kaCi (§ 5.4).
The suffixes he' and i which change a noun into an intransitive verb
(§ 6.35-6).

In addition to these, the following individual morphemes will appear in
the structural statements:
an. tr. suffix
an. intr. suffix
inan. tr. suffix
inan. intr. suffix
1 imperative (see § 2 above).
Ke intransitivizer suffix (§ 6.18, and § 3.1 above).
;)Ti reciprocal suffix (§ 6.34).

STRUCTURAL RESTATEMENTS: II

101

Ix 2-goal transitivizer suffix (§ 6.19).
- an intransitivizer (consisting of dropping the an of those alternants of inan.
tr. which end in man, § 3.10; 6.18).
kaCi don't (§ 5.4).
n indeed directive predicator suffix (§ 5.9-12, and § l.3 above).
rna past habituative suffix (§ 5.7).
e if, suffix occurring last except for u ought (§ 5.2).
apan past momentaneous suffix, occurring last except for inka preterite
(§ 5.5).
- VI +e' participle prefix (§ 4.9-11, and § 1.2 above).
s agentive suffix, occurring with participles (§ 4.9).
nk locative suffix after nouns (usually without preceding person, § 3.6).
Ti diminutive suffix (§ 6.37-9, and § 3.1 above).
a preterite final suffix (§ 3.11; 5.6; and § 1.6 above. Although it occurs after
some verbs as well as after nouns and participles, the incidence after
verbs is very small.).
u ought final suffix (§ 5.3).

5. MORPHEME SEQUENCES
The following equations indicate substitutability of the equated sequences
within longer constructions.
F 1 + F 2 = F. (E.g. kw;hi one, nHa two are substitutable for the sequences
kwaTu's six, ni'sa's seven.)
Vj +an. tr' j = Vat. (The subscript j indicates anyone of the sub-classes of
§ 3.4 above.)
V j + inan. tr. j = Vito
Vj+an. intr.j=Vai.
V + inan. intr. = Vii.
V+V 2 +an. intr.=Vai.
V + ;)lanc + h = V + I. (atanc by finger is V 2, h with fingers is I, § 6.29.)
Ij+an. tr.j=Iat.
Ij+inan. tr.j=Iit.
Vx+Iat=Vat. (Vx includes the V 2 above and other V, § 6.21.)
Vx+Iit= Vito
N + N2 = N'. (N' to indicate that the equation cannot be repeated.)
N+Nv=Vai.
V +aw+Ke= Vai. (aw is an alternant of an. tr.)
V + an. tr. + ;)Ti = Vai. (Alternatively, aTi could be added to the morpheme
class GR as an object pronoun; its position after an. tr. would be unexceptionable.)

102

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

v +an. intr.+lx+GR= Vat. (Hence two object pronouns may follow lx, one
more than follow Vat.)
V + inan. tr. - gn + aw + G R = Vat. (Substituting the an. tr. alternant aw for
the gn of in an. tr. alternants which end in gn makes room for two objects.)
V +inan. tr. -.m+N = Vit+GR. (nn{ngm t~ntay I'm going after the fire,
nna·Tgm~na I went after it with a as GR and Tgmgn as inan. tr.)
Beyond this point, it is more convenient to state all the remaining sequences
of morphemes within a stress-unit word in the form of a diagram. 22 Beginning from the left-hand edge, if we draw a line which never turns back
leftward (but goes to the right, or up, or down) and never crosses a horizontal
bar, then the sequence of morphemes (or morpheme classes) through which
the line passes is a sequence that occurs in Delaware.
Morphemes placed above and below each other are substitutable for each
other. Morphemes which are to the right or left of each other occur together
in some sequence, unless they are completely separated by a horizontal bar
(in which case they do not occur together in any sequence). The chief
shortcoming in this diagram lies in its failure to show much of the relative
order of the morphemes. 23 The order of morphemes in the diagram is in
general that which occurs in speech, except for the following major departures:
the main part of n, and the i·w portion of Q and kaci, occur just before GP,
as does Ti; I is a final suffix which may be said to occupy the position after it,
at, ai; e and gpan occur in the position just before a and a; rna is a final suffix

Vii

R~

n

GP

N

nk

G4
it

M

I

a
at

k.~i

ai
ap.iln

G2
G1

e
pan

-V1+e

a

G3

ma
Q

GP Ti

5

Fig.!.

STRUCTURAL RESTATEMENTS: II

103

(position ofa and Ii); when Rand s occur after M, 1, or- VI +e; they occupy
the position before GP, as P always does. The departures from the actual
order of the morphemes were necessary partly because many of the morphemes had alternants with different positions, but chiefly because morphemes which substituted for each other had to be placed one over the other
no matter where they occurred in speech; and morphemes which were most
clearly dependent on others in their distribution had to be placed in the
column adjoining those others if possible.
NOTES
See 'Structural Restatements: r, IJAL 13 (1947), 47-58. (Paper 5 of this volume.)
C. F. Voegelin, 'Delaware, an Eastern Algonquian Language', in Hoijer and others,
Linguistic Structures 0/ Native America, 130-57.
3 Section references are to Voegelin's article in LSNA, cited in note 2.
4 Read: minus first vowel plus e·. The phonemic constitution of this morpheme could
also be considered as a change of the first vowel into e·.
o Elements in parentheses are occasionally present, occasionally not. The dash marks the
point at which the :IIi occurs. The Verb includes intransitive or transitive, and (after
animate intransitive) goal suffixes. The first pronoun with i·lu· may also be replaced by
the verb maNi· cause (§ 6.20). 1/2 p. represents lst or 2nd person.
6 The only difference between the two occurrences being precisely in the presence of :Iii
in the environment.
7 The procedure here is similar to that in setting up junctures, which are zero elements
defined so as to differentiate two occurrences of what would otherwise be identical environments. This zero yields a simpler system than would keeping the :Iii as a separate
morpheme, only if we can identify the zero as an alternant of some other (zero) morphemes
in the language.
S The sg. or pI. is of the noun or the participle (= referent) proper. Since the sg. in Delaware
is in general indicated merely by lack of the plural suffix, we could consider the a as indicating the preterite alone.
9 For example in the Eskimo restatement, /JAL 13 (1947), 50-3. (Paper 5 of this
volume.)
10 If we do not break these morphemes up into underlying ones, we can distinguish the
imperative from the other verb forms by this particular set of addressee-object suffixes.
If, however, we break these suffixes up into underlying person and number morphemes
which would be considered as alternants of the other person and number morphemes,
then we require some environmental distinction for the imperative verbs to differentiate
them from the 'independent' verbs which also have the same person and number morphemes (though different alternants of them).
11 This is generally the case in Delaware. Aside from fitting into the general Delaware
pattern, considerations of economy are involved. If there are only two forms, sg. and pl.,
we can define singular as being merely absence of the pI. form; then any formal features
of the sg. can be used instead as some other morphological element (if any is needed in
that case).
111 It should be clear that description in terms of morpheme alternants in no way replaces
description in terms of morphophonemes. Although some cases can be equally conveniently treated in either manner, morpheme alternants are used primarily in cases in which
morphophonemic representation is not convenient.
13 In either case, there is nothing formal or cultural which requires us to translate it as
I and he.
1

2

104

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

14 Due to the dependence of plural on person (§ 1.7 above), the object plural could be
defined as that which occurs, if at all, only if two person affixes are present in the verb,
while the subject plural occurs, if at all, if either one or two person affixes are present. If
the plural of inanimate intransitive verbs is taken as an alternant of the subject plurals,
then we can say that the subject plural occurs if at all when zero or one or two person
affixes are present.
15 For convenience we will admit, not a general element of subject-object relation, but a
specific element G (goal) indicating object.
16 The number 4 indicates the obviate person (the other one). It is a restricted morpheme,
occurring as subject-possessor when a 3rd person subject-possessor is present in the neighborhood (though two 3rd persons, usually indicating the identical person, also occur in
each other's neighborhood), and as object of a 3rd person subject, and as suffix to a noun
when its possessor-prefix is 3rd person (§ 3.5, 13; 4.6).
17 When the object is plural, the G of person and plural could be considered as one long
object (goal) component extending necessarily over both morphemes: 3P +G/2P' (P' for
and J).
18 G without other person, i.e. G referring to I, when the 1st person is the object.
19 The subscripts are used here to indicate in what way alternants of the various morphemes occur after the same sub-classes of V or I. Thus Vb occurs before alternants i, m,
tu·n of the three morphemes, while Va occurs before alternants e, m, ntam:m. We may
write m as an. tr.a,b (i.e. that variant of the an. tr. morpheme which occurs after V•. b).
Then tU'n is inan. tr.b, and so on.
20 The non-initial stems are of course complementary to all initial stems. The question is
what distributional basis there is for combining the pairs which refer to the same body-part.
21 This would not constitute an adequate list for other purposes.
22 The diagram is presented here not as a clearer display of forms, but as a compact
expression of their complex relative distributions. It does not repeat distributional statements made in English, but replaces them.
23 Among the other shortcOlnings are the repetition of ;)pan and GP. Since the geometric
relations correspond to the distributional relations among the morphemes, the correspondence loses from placing a morpheme in two geometric positions. The diagram is also
unable to show that - VI + e· occurs usually with the 3rd person morpheme of R, and
that apreterite occurs after very few non-participle verbs, and that every 3 + N is followed
by G4 (obviative).

TRANSFORMATIONAL ANALYSIS

7

DISCOURSE ANALYSIS

This paper presents a method for the analysis of connected speech (or
writing),1 The method is formal, depending only on the occurrence of
morphemes as distinguishable elements; it does not depend upon the
analyst's knowledge of the particular meaning of each morpheme. By the
same token, the method does not give us any new information about the
individual morphemic meanings that are bei ng communicated in the
discourse under investigation. But the fact that such new information is not
obtained does not mean that we can discover nothing about the discourse
but how the grammar of the language is exemplified within it. For even
though we use formal procedures akin to those of descriptive linguistics, we
can obtain new information about the particular text we are studying, information that goes beyond descriptive linguistics.
This additional information results from one basic fact: the analysis of the
occurrence of elements in the text is applied only in respect to that text alone
- that is, in respect to the other elements in the same text, and not in respect
to anything else in the language. As a result of this, we discover the particular
interrelations of the morphemes of the text as they occur in that one text;
and in so doing we discover something of the structure of the text, of what is
being done in it. We may not know just WHAT a text is saying, but we can
discover HOW it is saying - what are the patterns of recurrence of its chief
morphemes.
Definite patterns may be discovered for particular texts, or for particular
persons, styles, or subject-matters. In some cases, formal conclusions can be
drawn from the particular pattern of morpheme distribution in a text. And
often it is possible to show consistent differences of structure between the
discourses of different persons, or in different styles, or about different
subject-matters.
1. PRELIMINARIES
1.1. The Problem
One can approach discourse analysis from two types of problem, which turn
Language 28, No.1 (1952), 1-30.

107

108

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

out to be related. The first is the problem of continuing descriptive linguistics beyond the limits of a single sentence at a time. The other is the
question of correlating 'culture' and language (i.e. non-linguistic and
linguistic behavior).
The first problem arises because descriptive linguistics generally stops at
sentence boundaries. This is not due to any prior decision. The techniques of
linguistics were constructed to study any stretch of speech, of whatever
length. But in every language it turns out that almost all the results lie
within a relatively short stretch, which we may call a sentence. That is, when
we can state a restriction on the occurrence of element A in respect to the
occurrence of element B, it will almost always be the case that A and Bare
regarded as occurring within the same sentence. Of English adjectives, for
instance, we can say that they occur before a noun or after certain verbs (in
the same sentence): the dark clouds, the future seems bright; only rarely can we
state restrictions across sentence boundaries, e.g. that if the main verb of one
sentence has a given tense-suffix, the main verb of the next sentence will have
a particular other tense-suffix. We cannot say that if one sentence has the
form N V, the next sentence will have the form N. We can only say that
most sentences are N V, some are N, and so on; and that these structures
occur in various sequences.
In this w.ay descriptive linguistics, which sets out to describe the occurrence
of elements in any stretch of speech, ends up by describing it primarily in
respect to other elements of the same sentence. This limitation has not
seemed too serious, because it has not precluded the writing of adequate
grammars: the grammar states the sentence structure; the speaker makes up a
particular sentence in keeping with this structure, and supplies the particular
sequence of sentences.
The other problem, that of the connection between behavior (or social
situation) and language, has always been considered beyond the scope of
linguistics proper. Descriptive linguistics has not dealt with the meanings of
morphemes; and though one might try to get around that by speaking not of
meanings, but of the social and interpersonal situation in which speech
occurs, descriptive linguistics has had no equipment for taking the social
situation into account: it has only been able to state the occurrence of one
linguistic element in respect to the occurrence of others. Culture-and-Ianguage
studies have therefore been carried on without benefit of the recent distributional investigations of linguistics. For example, they list the meanings
expressed in the language by surveying the vocabulary stock; or they draw
conclusions from the fact that in a particular language a particular set of
meanings is expressed by the same morpheme; or they discuss the nuances of
meaning and usage of one word in comparison with others (e.g. in stylistics).

DISCOURSE ANALYSIS

109

Culture-and-Ianguage studies have also noted such points as that phrases are
to be taken in their total meaning rather than as the sum of the meanings of
their component morphemes, e.g. that How are you is a greeting rather than
a question about health - an example that illustrates the correlation of
speech with social situation. Similarly, personality char~cteristics in speech
have been studied by correlating an individual's recurrent speech features
with recurrent features of his behavior and feeling. 2
1.2. Distribution within Discourse

Distributional or combinatorial analysis within one discourse at a time
turns out to be relevant to both of these problems.
On the one hand, it carries us past the sentence limitation of descriptive
linguistics. Although we cannot state the distribution of sentences (or, in
general, any inter-sentence relation) when we are given an arbitrary conglomeration of sentences in a language, we can get quite definite results
about certain relations across sentence boundaries when we consider just the
sentences of particular connected discourse - that is, the sentences spoken
or written in succession by one or more persons in a single situation. This
restriction to connected discourse does not detract from the usefulness of the
analysis, since all language occurrences are internally connected. Language
does not occur in stray words or sentences, but in connected discourse from a one-word utterance to a ten-volume work, from a monolog to a
Union Square argument. Arbitrary conglomerations of sentences are indeed
of no interest except as a check on grammatical description; and it is not
surprising that we cannot find interdependence among the sentences of such
an aggregate. The successive sentences of a connected discourse, however,
offer fertile soil for the methods of descriptive linguistics, since these methods
study the relative distribution of elements within a connected stretch of
speech.
On the other hand, distributional analysis within one discourse at a time
yields information about certain correlations of language with other behavior. The reason is that each connected discourse occurs within a particular
situation - whether of a person speaking, or of a conversation, or of someone
sitting down occasionally over a period of months to write a particular kind
of book in a particular literary or scientific tradition. To be sure, this
concurrence between situation and discourse does not mean that discourses
occurring in similar situations must necessarily have certain formal characteristics in common, while discourses occurring in different situations
must have certain formal differences. The concurrence between situation and
discourse only makes it understandable, or possible, that such formal
correlations should exist.

110

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

It remains to be shown as a matter of empirical fact that such formal
correlations do indeed exist, that the discourses of a particular person, social
group, style, or subject-matter exhibit not only particular meanings (in their
selection of morphemes) but also characteristic formal features. The particular
selection of morphemes cannot be considered here. But the formal features
of the discourses can be studied by distributional methods within the text;
and the fact of their correlation with a particular type of situation gives a
meaning-status to the occurrence of these formal features.

1.3. Conjunction with Grammar
The method presented here is thus seen to grow out of an application of the
distributional methods of linguistics to one discourse at a time. It can be
applied directly to a text, without using any linguistic knowledge about the
text except the morpheme boundaries. This is possible because distributional
analysis is an elementary method, and involves merely the statement of the
relative occurrence of elements, in this case morphemes. To establish the
method for its own sake, or for possible application to non-linguistic
material, no prior knowledge should be used except the boundaries of the
elements.
However, when we are interested not in the method alone but in its results,
when we want to use the method in order to find out all that we can about a
particular text, then it is useful to combine this method with descriptive linguistics. To this end we would use only those statements of the grammar of
the language which are true for any sentence of a given form. For example,
given any English sentence of the form N1 V N2 (e.g. The boss fired Jim), we
can get a sentence with the noun phrases in the reverse order N2 - N1 (Jim the boss) by changing the suffixes around the verb 3 : Jim was fired by the
boss. The justification for using such grammatical information in the analysis
of a text is that since it is applicable to any N1 V N2 sentence in English it
must also be applicable to any N1 V N2 sentence in the particular text before
us, provided only that this is written in English. The desirability of using
such information is that in many cases it makes possible further applications of the discourse-analysis method.
How this happens will appear in § 2.33; but it should be said here that
such use of grammatical information does not replace work that could be
done by the discourse-analysis method, nor does it alter the independence of
that method. It merely transforms certain sentences of the text into grammatically equivalent sentences (as Nt V N2 above was transformed into
N2 V* N 1), in such a way that the application of the discourse-analysis
method becomes more convenient, or that it becomes possible in particUlar
sections of the text where it was not possible to apply it before. And it will be

DISCOURSE ANALYSIS

111

seen that the decision where and how to apply these grammatical transformations need not be arbitrary but can be determined by the structure of
the text itself.
The applicability of the discourse-analysis method in particular texts can
be further increased if we not only use the ordinary results of grammar but
also extend descriptive linguistics to deal with the special distributions of
individual morphemes. There are cases, as will be seen in § 2.33 below, when
we would like to use information not about all the morphemes of some class
(like the transformability of V into V*) but about a particular member of the
class, about a restriction of occurrence which is true for that one morpheme
but not for the others of its class. Such information is not in general available
today; but it can be obtained by methods which are basically those of
descriptive linguistics.
Finally, the applicability of discourse analysis in particular texts can
sometimes be increased if we draw our information not only from the
grammar of the language but also from a descriptive analysis of the body of
speech or writing of which our text is a part. This larger body of material
may be looked upon as the dialect within which the text was spoken or
written, and we can say as before that any distributional statement which
is true for all sentences of a given form in that dialect will also hold for any
sentence of that form in the text under consideration.
2. THE METHOD

2.0. The Nature of the Method

We have raised two problems: that of the distributional relations among
sentences, and that of the correlation between language and social situation.
We have proposed that information relevant to both of these problems can
be obtained by a formal analysis of one stretch of discourse at a time. What
KIND of analysis would be applicable here? To decide this, we consider what
is permitted by the material.
Since the material is simply a string of linguistic forms arranged in
successive sentences, any formal analysis is limited to locating linguistic
elements within these sentences - that is, to stating the occurrence of
elements. We cannot set up any method for investigating the nature or
composition of these elements, or their correlations with non-linguistic
features, unless we bring in new information from outside.
Furthermore, there are no particular elements, say but or lor communism,
which have a prior importance, such as would cause us to be interested in the
mere fact of their presence or absence in our text. Any analysis which aimed
to find out whether certain particular words, selected by the investigator,

112

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

occur in the text or not, would be an investigation of the CONTENT of the text
and would be ultimately based on the MEANINGS of the words selected. If we
do not depend upon meaning in our investigation, then the only morphemes
or classes which we can deal with separately are those which have grammatically stated peculiarities of distribution.
Since, then, we are not in general interested in any particular element
selected in advance, our interest in those elements that do occur cannot be
merely in the tautologic statement THAT they occur, but in the empirical
statement of HOW they occur: which ones occur next to which others, or in
the same environment as which others, and so on - that is, in the relative
occurrence of these elements with respect to each other. In this sense, our
method is comparable to that which is used, in the case of a whole language,
in compiling a grammar (which states the distributional relations among
elements), rather than in compiling a dictionary (which lists all the elements
that are found in the language, no matter where).
Finally, since our material is a closed string of sentences, our statement
about the distribution of each element can only be valid within the limits of
this succession of sentences, whether it be a paragraph or a book. We will see
in § 2.33 that we can sometimes use information about the distribution of an
element outside our material; but this can be only an external aid, brought in
after the distribution of the element within the discourse has been completely
stated.
2.1. General Statement of the Method
It follows from all this that our method will have to provide statements of the
occurrence of elements, and in particular of the relative occurrence of all the
elements of a discourse within the limits of that one discourse.

2.11. Elements in Identical Environments
We could satisfy this requirement by setting up detailed statements of the
distribution of each element within the discourse, just as in descriptive
linguistics we could set up individual statements summarizing all the
environments (i.e. the distribution) of each element in various sentences of
the language. However, such individual statements are unmanageably large
for a whole language, and are unwieldy even for a single text. In both cases,
moreover, the individual statements are an inconvenient basis for inspection
and comparison, and for the deriving of general statements. Therefore, in
discourse analysis as in descriptive linguistics, we collect those elements
which have like distributions into one class, and thereafter speak of the
distribution of the class as a whole rather than of each element individually.
When two elements have identical distributions, this operation of collecting

DISCOURSE ANALYSIS

113

presents no problem. In descriptive linguistics, however, the opportunity
rarely occurs, since few words have identical distributions throughout a
language. 4 It may occur more frequently in a repetitive text, where two
words may be always used in identical parallel sentences - e.g. in stylistically
balanced myths, in proverbs, in sloganeering speeches, and in 'dry' but
meticulous scientific reports.
2.12. Elements in Equivalent Environments
In the much more frequent case where two elements occur in environments
which are almost but not quite identical, we may be able to collect them into
one distributional class by setting up a chain of equivalences connecting the
two almost identical environments. 5 This is done in descriptive linguistics
when we say that the class of adjectives A occurs before the class of nouns
N, even though a particular A (say voluntary) may never occur before a
particular N (say subjugation). It is done in discourse analysis when we say
that two stretches which have the same environment in one place are
equivalent even in some other place where their environment is not the same.
Suppose our text contains the following four sentences: The trees turn here
about the middle of autumn; The trees turn here about the end of October; The
first frost comes after the middle of autumn; We start heating after the end of
October. Then we may say that the middle of autumn and the end of October
are equivalent because they occur in the same environment (The trees turn
here about -), and that this equivalence is carried over into the latter two
sentences. On that basis, we may say further that The first frost comes and
We start heating occur in equivalent environments. (The additional word
after is identical in the two environments.) Such chains, which carryover
the equivalence of two stretches from one pair of sentences where their
environment is indeed identical to another pair of sentences where it is not,
must of course be constructed with adequate safeguards, lest everything be
made equivalent to everything else, and the analysis collapse. This problem
appears also in setting up classes in descriptive linguistics; the kind of
safeguards necessary in discourse analysis will be discussed in § 2.21.
More generally, if we find the sequences A M and A N in our text, we say
that M is equivalent to N or that M and N occur in the identical environment
A, or that M and N both appear as the environment of the identical element
(or sequence of elements) A ; and we write M=N. Then if we find the sequence
B M and C N (or M Band N C) in our text, we say that B is (secondarily)
equivalent to C, since they occur in the two environments M and N which
have been found to be equivalent; and we write B = C. If we further find B K
and C L, we would write K=L by virtue of their having occurred in the
secondarily equivalent environments Band C; and so on. As an example, let

114

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

us continue our text fragment with the following sentence: We always have a
lot of trouble when we start heating but you've got to be prepared when the
first frost comes. Then we would say that We always have a lot of trouble is
equivalent (for this text) to but you've got to be prepared.
Saying that B= C does not mean that they are IN GENERAL equal to each
other, or that they MEAN the same thing. The equal-sign is used only because
the relation between Band C satisfies the technical requirements of the
relation which is generally marked by that sign. All we mean when we write
B= C is that this relation is a step in a chain of equivalences: on the one
hand, Band C are found in equivalent environments (M and N); and on the
other, any two environments in which Band C are found will be considered
equivalent (K and L).
It is not relevant to ask, 'Is it TRUE that B= C?' or 'Have we the RIGHT to
say that K = L merely because B = C and because B K and C L occur?' All
that is proposed here is a method of analysis; the only relevant questions are
whether the method is usable, and whether it leads to valid and interesting
results. Whether the method is usable can be judged on the basis of its
operations, without regard to its results, as yet unseen. Whether these results
are of interest will be considered in § 3 below, where we will see that the
chains of equivalence reveal a structure for each text. There is no question
whether we have the 'right' to put K=L, because all we indicate by K=L
is that B K and C L occur and that B= C. The justification will depend on
the fact that when we put all the equivalences together we will obtain some
information about the structure of the text.

2.13. Equivalence Classes
After discovering which sequences occur in equivalent environments, we
can group all of them together into one equivalence class. In our formulaic
statement we have A = B (both occur before M), and A = C (both before N),
and B= C, so that we consider A, B, C all members of one equivalence class.
Similarly, M, N, K, L are members of another single equivalence class. In
our example, The trees turn here in (T1) and The first frost comes after (T2 )
and We start heating after (T3 ) are all members of one equivalence class T,
while the middle of autumn (E1 ) and the end of October (E2 ) are members of
another equivalence class E. There is yet a third class E' consisting of We
always have a lot of trouble when and but you've got to be prepared when. E' is
obviously related to E, since both occur with the last two members of T. But
E occurs AFTER T, whereas E' occurs BEFORE T.
In terms of these classes, the five sentences of our text fragment can be
written as six formulas (since the last sentence was a double one): T E, T E,
T E, T E, E' T, E' T. It is clear that we cannot make one class out of E and

DISCOURSE ANALYSIS

115

E'; but we can say that when the order of E and T is reversed (when E is
'reflected' in T), we get E' instead of E. Ifwe change the members of E' to the
form they would have if they came after T instead of before, then those
changed members of E' become regular members of E. For example, we
might say We start heating at the cost of a lot of trouble always, but the first
frost comes in a way you've got to be preparedfor. This sentence has the form
T E, T E. The new phrase at the cost of a lot of trouble always is a member of
E by virtue of its occurrence after T; we can mark it E 3 • Of course, we must
show that it is equivalent to We always have a lot of trouble, except for the
reversed position in repect to T; to show this, we need techniques which will
be discussed in § 2.33. Similarly, we must show that the new E phrase but ... in
a way you've got to be prepared for (E4 ) is the T reflection of the E' phrase
but you've got to be prepared when. If we can show these two reflectionequivalences, we can replace the two E' phrases by the changed phrases which
we get when we put them in the E position. As a result we have two more
members of E, and no peculiar E' class.
In such ways we can set up equivalence classes (like E) of all sequences

which have equivalent environments, i.e. the same equivalence classes on the
same side (before or after), within the text. The elements (or sequences of
elements) which are included in the same equivalence class may be called
equivalent. to, or substituents of, each other. We will see later (§ 3.3) that in
some respects (especially in extensions of the text) they may be considered
substitutable or interchangeable for each other. In that case the equivalence
class may also be called a substitution class.
Note especially that the operation of grouping non-identical forms into
the same equivalence class does not depend upon disregarding small differences in meaning among them, but upon finding them in equivalent environments. This means either finding them in identical environments (the
middle of autumn and the end of October both occur in the environment The
trees turn here in -) or else finding them in environments which are at the
ends of a safeguarded chain of equivalences (The first frost comes and We
start heating occur in the equivalent environments after the middle of autumn
and after the end of October). The method is thus fundamentally that of
descriptive linguistics and not of semantics.
2.14. Sentence Order

At this point we come to an operation not used in descriptive linguistics:
representing the order of successive occurrences of members of a class. In
descriptive linguistics order comes into consideration only as the relative
position of various sections of a sequence, as when the order of article and
noun is described by saying that the first precedes the second along the line

116

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

of a noun phrase. In discourse analysis we have this kind of order as among
the sections of a sentence, e.g. the different orders of E and E' in respect
to T.
The order of successive sentences, or of some particular word class in
various sentences (say, the relation of successive subjects), is not generally
relevant to descriptive linguistics, because its distributional statements are
normally valid within only one sentence at a time. Here, however, where we
are dealing with a whole discourse at once, this problem is a real one. If we
were considering each sentence separately, and relating it to others only for
purposes of structural comparison, we could say (as in descriptive linguistics)
that each sentence in our text fragment consists of T E. But since we are
speaking of the text as a whole, we cannot say that it consists merely of T E
six times over. The particular members of E and of T are different in the
various sentences; and these differences may be (for all we know) peculiar to
this text, or to a group of similar texts.
Our text fragment can be structurally represented by a double array, the
horizontal axis indicating the material that occurs within a single sentence or
subsentence, and the vertical axis (here broken into two parts) indicating the
successive sentences:
T1 E1
T1 E2
T2 E1

T3 £2
T3 E3
T2 E4

In this double array, the various symbols in one horizontal row represent the
various sections of a single sentence or subsentence of the text, in the order in
which they occur in the sentence (except insofar as the order has been altered
by explicit transformations in the course of reducing to symbols, as in the
change from £' to E). The vertical columns indicate the various members of
an equivalence class, in the order of the successive sentences in which they
occur.
The reason why the order of symbols in a row may differ from the order of
elements in a sentence, is that our linguistic knowledge of sentence structure
enables us to deal with the elements separately from their order. We do this
when we disregard in our symbols any order that is automatic and that would
reappear as soon as our symbols are translated back into language, as when
but ... is included in E4 even though it is necessarily separated from E4 in the
actual sentence (since but generally occurs at the beginning of a sentence
structure, no matter which section of the sentence it may be related to). We
also perform this separation of elements from their order when we replace
some non-automatic order which has morphemic value by the morphemes
which are grammatically equivalent to it; for example, when we replace

DISCOURSE ANALYSIS

117

Nl V N2 by N2 V* Nl (replacing The boss fired Jim by Jim was fired by
the boss); or when, in our text fragment, E' before T is replaced by E
after T.
In contrast with this cavalier treatment of horizontal order, we cannot alter
anything about the order within a vertical column. Here we have no prior
linguistic knowledge to tell us which orderings of sentences (if any) are
automatic and therefore not to be represented, or which orderings can be
replaced by different but equivalent orderings. A closer study of sentence
sequences in the language may some day give us such information in the
future; for instance, to take a very simple case, it might show that sentence
sequences of the form P because Q are equivalent to sequences of the form
Q so P, or that P and Q is interchangeable with Q and P (whereas P but Q
may not be similarly interchangeable with Q but P). 6 Furthermore, a closer
study of a particular text, or of texts of a particular type, may show that
certain whole sequences of sentences are equivalent or interchangeable; and
with this information we may be able to simplify the vertical axis of the
double array, for example by finding periodically repeated vertical patterns.
Pending such specific information, however, the vertical axis is an exact
reproduction of the order of the sentences or subsentences in the text.

2.15. Summary
We can now survey the whole method as follows. We call elements (sections
of the text - morphemes or morpheme sequences) equivalent to each other
if they occur in the environment of (other) identical or equivalent elements.
Each set of mutually equivalent elements is called an equivalence class.
Each successive sentence of the text is then represented as a sequence of
equivalence classes, namely those to which its various sections belong. We
thus obtain for the whole text a double array, the horizontal axis representing
the equivalence classes contained in one sentence, and the vertical axis
representing successive sentences. This is a tabular arrangement not of
sentence structures (subjects, verbs, and the like), but of the patterned
occurrence of the equivalence classes through the text.
If the different sentences contain completely different classes, the tabular
arrangement is of no interest; but this is generally not the case. In almost
every text there are passages in which particular equivalence classes recur, in
successive sentences, in some characteristic pattern. The tabular arrangement
makes it possible to inspect this pattern; and we can derive from it various
kinds of information about the text, certain structural analyses of the text,
and certain critiques of the text. For the equivalence classes, which are set
up distributionally, the tabular arrangement shows the distribution. For the
text as a whole, the tabular arrangement shows certain features of structure.

118

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

2.2. Procedure

We will now illustrate the procedure in detail by applying it to a specific
text, of a type as common today as any other that reaches print 7:
Millions Can't Be Wrong!
Millions of consumer bottles of X- have been sold since its introduction a
few years ago. And four out of five people in a nationwide survey say
they prefer x- to any hair tonic they've used. Four out offive people in a
nation-wide survey can't be wrong. You too and your whole family will
prefer X-to any hair tonic you've used! Every year we sell more bottles
of x- to satisfied customers. You too will be satisfied!
2.21. Determining the Equivalence Classes
The first step in discourse analysis is to decide which elements are to be
taken as equivalent to each other, i.e. placed in the same column of the
tabular arrangement. This is not always automatic - simply a matter of
finding which elements have identical environments; for (1) there may be
several ways of breaking a sentence down into equivalent parts, and (2)
we must decide which way to look for the less obvious equivalence chains.
The simplest starting point is to consider the more frequently repeated
words of the text. Almost every text has particular words which occur a
great many times 8; and these will often be key words of that text. The various
occurrences of such a word can certainly be put into one column, i.e. one
equivalence class. And the neighboring words can be put into another single
equivalence class because they occur in identical environments. In our text
no key words are apparent; but we can start with the identical, and hence of
course equivalent, repeated sequence can't be wrong. Then Millions is
equivalent (for this text) to Four out of five people in a nationwide survey, .
since both occur before that sequence.
This first step might of course also be performed for such repeated words
as of But if we were to collect all the environments of the word of, we could
not use the resulting equivalence class to build up a chain of further equivalences, because nothing else would be found in their environment. Whereas
the class containing Millions and Four out of five .. " which we obtain from
repetitions of can't be wrong, will be found, in the paragraphs below, to tie
up with other sections of our text.
From this utilization of repetitions we go on to construct chains of equivalence - that is, we ask what other environments occur for Millions and for
Four out of five .... For Millions we have one other environment, namely of
consumer bottles, etc. It will turn out in our further work (§ 3.2) that this

DISCOURSE ANALYSIS

119

environment clashes with the environments of Four out offive .... Therefore
we will tentatively set aside the sequence of consumer bottles, etc. As for
Four out of five people in a nationwide survey, we find it in one other environment: before say they prefer x- to any hair tonic they've used.
We proceed along this equivalence chain by looking for some other
environment in which say they prefer X - ... occurs. There is one such occurrence, but it differs by having you where the first occurrence has they. At
first it seems that this difference makes it impossible for us to consider the
two sequences equivalent, since our method provides for no approximation
technique, no measurement of more and less difference, such as might
permit us to say that these two sequences are similar enough to be considered
equivalent. Indeed, since we do not operate with the meanings of the
morphemes, the replacing of they by you might constitute a great difference
(as it would if the whole text dealt with the distinction between 'you' and
'they'). As they stand, therefore, these two sequences would be left unrelated
by our method; at most that method could separate out the identical and the
different portions. It so happens, however, that a little consideration shows
these two sequences to be contextually identical - that is, identical in respect
to their relevant environment or context. This will be seen in § 2.31.
In constructing chains of equivalence the first safeguard is adherence to the
formal requirements of the method. If we never make any approximations,
never overlook some 'small' difference in environment, we will be certain
that any two members of one equivalence class have at least one environment
in common. If we wish to put two elements into one class even though no
environment of one is identical with some environment of the other, it will
have to be at the cost of some explicit assumption, added to the method,
which equates the two environments or nullifies their difference.
The final factor in our decision to include or not to include two elements in
one equivalence class is the way the resulting class will function in the
analysis of the text, i.e. the kind of double array we get by using that class.
This factor must playa part, since there are often various possible chains of
equivalence that equally satisfy our method. The criterion is not some external
consideration like getting the longest possible chain, but rather the intrinsic
consideration of finding some patterned distribution of these classes, i.e.
finding some structural fact about the text in terms of these classes. In other
words, we try to set up such classes as will have an interesting distribution in
our particular text. This may seem a rather circular safeguard for constructing equivalence chains. But it simply means that whenever we have to
decide whether to carry an equivalence chain one step further, we exercise
the foresight of considering how the new interval will fit into our analyzed
text as it appears when represented in terms of the new class. This kind of

120

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

consideration occurs in descriptive linguistics when we have 1:0 decide, for
example, how far to subdivide a phonemic sequence into morphemes. 9
One might ask what right we have to put two words into one equivalence
class merely because they both occur in the same environment. The answer is
that the equivalence class indicates no more than the distributional work
which its members do in the text. If the two words occur only in identical or
equivalent environments in this text, then in this text there is no difference in
their distribution (aside from their order in the column, which is preserved).
We are not denying any difference in meaning, or in distribution outside this
text.
So far we have recognized two equivalence classes. One, which we will
mark P, at present includes
Millions
Four out ofjive people in a nationwide survey

The other, which we will mark W, at present includes
can't be wrong
say they prefer x- to any hair tonic they've used
2.22. Segmentation

Once we have a rough idea of what equivalence classes we wish to tryout
in our text, we segment the text into successive intervals in such a way as to
get, in each interval, like occurrences of the same equivalence classes. If our
classes so far are P and W, and if we have a few P W successions, we try to
segment into intervals each containing precisely one P and one W. For
example, the title of the advertisement is represented by P W. The first
sentence after the title seems to contain a P (the word Millions), but the rest
of the sentence neither equals nor contains W; hence the sentence is as yet
unanalyzed, and even its P is in doubt.
Assignment of an element to a particular class is always relative to the
assignment of its environment. The elements are not defined except in
relation to their environment. For all we know, Millions in this sentence
might not even be the same word as Millions in the title. In descriptive
linguistics two phonemically identical segments are the same morpheme only
if they occur in the same morpheme class: sun and son would presumably have
to be considered the 'same' morpheme, no less than table (of wood) and
table (of statistical data). If they occur in different morpheme classes, e.g.
sea and see, they certainly are not the same morpheme; and if we want to
keep in view the connection between (a) table and (to) table, we have to speak
of classed and unclassed morphemes, and say that the unclassed morpheme

DISCOURSE ANAL YSIS

121

table appears both in the N class and in the V class. Similarly, if Millions
occurs twice we try to consider it a repeated 'same' morpheme (hence in the
same class), and so consider its two environments equivalent. But we may
find later that a better text-analysis is obtained by not considering those two
environments equivalent (because the first environment is equivalent to one
sequence A in the text, while the second is equivalent to a different sequence
B which is not equivalent to A). In that case we may have to consider the two
occurrences of Millions as belonging to two different classes. In § 3.2, we will
find this to be the case here.
To return to our segmentation. The second sentence in our text is P W, and
the third is P W. Hence we try to segment our text into successive stretches
each of which will contain just P Wand no more. These stretches will then
be the successive rows of our double array. They will often be whole sentences,
but not necessarily: they may also be the separate sections of a compound
sentence, each of which has its own sentence structure (as in the two E' T of
§ 2.13). But they may also be any other stretches taken out of the sentence.
For example, if we found in our advertisement the sentence Millions of
people - four out offive - can't be wrong when they say they prefer X -, which
as it stands seems to consist of P P W W, we would try to reduce it to two
P W intervals. Such less obvious segmentations require care, since we want
not only the P and the W occurrences to be the same in each interval, but
also the relation between P and W to be the same. When each whole sentence
in a string is reduced to P W, the relation between P and W in each interval
is the same; from descriptive linguistics we know it is the relation of subject
to predicate. We do not need to use this specific information in tabulating
our text as a succession of P W, but we do assume that whatever the relation
between P and W in one interval, it is the same in all the other intervals.
Otherwise we would be wrong in saying, when we see such a double array as
the successive T E of § 2.14, that the successive intervals are identical in
terms of T and E. Techniques for checking the sameness of the relation
between the equivalence classes in each row will be discussed in §§ 2.32-3.
2.23. Sets of Like Segments
The attempt to divide a text into intervals containing the same equivalence
classes (in the same relation to each other) will not generally succeed throughout a whole text. There may be individual sentences here and there which
simply do not contain these classes. These may turn out to be introductory
sentences, or offshoots of some other set of equivalence classes. And there
may be successive sections of the text, each of which contains its own
equivalence classes different from those of other sections. These may be
paragraph-like or Ghapter-like sub-texts within the main text.

122

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

In the course of seeking intervals which contain the same classes, our
procedures will discover the limits of this sameness, i.e. the points at which
we get text-intervals containing different classes. In the general case, then, a
text will be reduced not to a single set of identical rows (each row, like T E,
representing an interval with the same equivalence classes), but to a succession
of sets of identical rows, with occasional individually different rows occurring
at one point or another.
Having obtained this result, we compare the various sets and individual
rows to see what similarities and differences exist among them in the arrangement of their classes, whether the specific classes are different or not. We try
to discover patterns in the occurrence of such similarities among the successive
sets and individually different rows. For example, let a text come out to be
AB TE TE TE A'B' EP EP AB KD LM LM K'D' MS MS MS FBV MS.

Then, using [TE] to indicate a set of TE intervals, and temporarily disregarding the FBV, we can represent the text by AB [TE] A'B' [EP] AB KD [LM]
K'D' [MS]. We note, further, that AB [TE] A'B' [EP] and KD [LM] K'D'
[MS] are structurally identical: both have the form w [xy] w' [yz]. This
form is a particular relation of w, x, y, and z. Our text consists of two
occurrences of this structure, with the w of the first occurrence (that
is, the AB) appearing again between the two structures (or before the
second structure), and with a unique FBV before the end of the last structure.
2.3. Accessory Techniques

The main procedure, as described in the foregoing section, must be refined
and supplemented by a number of accessory techniques.
2.31. Independent Occurrence
The distribution of equivalence classes (their pattern of occurrence), and
the segmentation of intervals containing them, depend on what we recognize
as an occurrence of an element. At first sight, this would seem to be trivial:
in the stretch say they prefer x- to any hair tonic they've used we obviously
find say once, they twice, and so on. Closer consideration, however, will
show that not all occurrences of elements are independent: there are some
elements which occur, in a given environment, only when some other element is present. This situation is known from descriptive linguistics; for
example, the -s of he walks is taken not as an independent element but as an
automatic concomitant of he, by comparison with I walk, you walk 10; and in
forms like both he and I the and always occurs if both is present, so that both
.. .and can be taken as one element rather than two. In the same way, if in a
particular text we find identical (repeated) or different elements, of which

DISCOURSE ANALYSIS

123

one occurs only if the other is present, we conclude that these occurrences
are not independent of each other, and mark their joint occurrence as a
single element in the representation of the text.
For they prefer x- to any hair tonic they've lIsed, our only comparison is
You too and your whole family will prefer x- to any hair tOllic you've used. In
each case, the stretch before prefer contains the same word that we find
before 've. We can therefore say that the word before 've is not independent;
rather, the choice of one or the other member of the set they/you depends on
which word of that set occurs before prefer. Writing Q as a sign to repeat
that member of the set they/you which occurs in the stretch before prefer, we
obtain:
they prefer x- to any hair tonic Q've used
You ... will prefer X-to any hair tonic Q've used
It now appears that by reducing these stretches to their independent elements,
the latter sections have become identical. On this basis, the beginning
sections of these two sentences are found to have identical environments, and
hence to be equivalent. Since the first of these beginning sections was
included in our class P, we can now include the section You too ... in P as
well. 11
This is only one kind of dependent occurrence. There are many others
which have to be investigated; and the resulting information is of use both to
discourse analysis and to a more detailed descriptive linguistics.
One major example is that of the pronouns. If the advertisement had read
You." will prefer it instead of You ... will prefer X-, we would at first regard
it as a new element, to be placed in a new equivalence class. However, the
occurrence of it is dependent on the occurrence of X -: if the preceding Xhad contained the plural morpheme (X-s), the pronoun in this sentence
would. have been them. Other words of the it group, say he or you, will not
occur here as long as X- occurs in the preceding sentence; but they could
occur if certain other words were used in place of X-. The same is true of
words like this/these, who/which, which also depend on particular words
occurring somewhere else in the passage. Without using any information
about the meaning of these pronouns, or about their 'referring' to preceding
nouns, we can conclude from their distribution in the text that they are not
independent elements: they contain a (discontinuous) portion of the occurrence of the morpheme with which they correlate.
Another type of dependent occurrence is found in such expressions of cross
reference as each other and together, which carry out in language some of the
functions filled in mathematical expressions by variables - but in the vaguer
and more complex way that is characteristic of language. The sentence

124

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

Foster and Lorch saw each other at the same moment is normal; but if we
drop the words and Lorch, every native speaker of English will immediately
replace each other by something else. To put it differently: we will not find
any sentence that contains each other but does not contain either the expression and Z or a plural morpheme in the relevant noun. Furthermore,
though we will find the sentence Electrons and positrons attract each other,
we will not find - at least in a physics textbook - the same sentence with the
words and positrons omitted, unless there are also other changes such as
repel in place of attract.
It may be noted that dependent elements are especially prone to be
assigned to different equivalence classes in their various occurrences, since
each occurrence of them is assigned to the class of whatever element correlates with that particular occurrence. If the text contained You will prefer
X-, You will prefer it, The survey showed, It showed, the first occurrence
of it would be assigned to the class of X-, the second it to the class of
survey.
In all such cases the special relations of dependent occurrence among
particular elements can be eliminated by considering the dependent element
to be simply a portion of that element with which it correlates (upon which
its occurrence depends). It should be clear that when we speak of dependence, the term is only required to apply within a particular text. The
dependence of pronouns or cross-reference words upon some neighboring
noun may hold in every text in which these words occur; but the dependence between the two occurrences of they or of you in our text is peculiar to
this text. Elsewhere we may find the sentence they prefer x- to any hair tonic
you've used; but in this particular text such a sentence does not occur. It is
for that reason that in this text we can tell what the second pronoun must be
by looking at the first one.
2.32. Subdivisions of Sentences
The recognition of dependent elements affects our decision concerning the
number of intervals into which a particular sentence is to be subdivided.
Where an element has dependent portions spread over a domain, we
generally have to consider the whole domain as entering into one interval
with that element. For example, in they prefer x- to any hair tonic they've
used we have established that the two occurrences of they are interdependent
in this text. Hence we can analyze this section into they (occurring over both
positions) plus ... prefer X- to any hair tonic ... 've used; and similarly for the
sentence with you (also over both positions). This is a more general treatment than that of § 2.31, which gave favored status to the first occurrence of
they and of you by considering the second occurrence to be dependent on the

DISCOURSE ANALYSIS

125

first, and which made the identity of the two sentences in their latter portions
depend on their both containing the same kind of dependence (Q). The
present treatment eliminates dependence by viewing the single they or you
as occurring over two positions, and makes the second parts of the sentences
identical without qualification. The effect of this new treatment is that since
the two-position they stretches over almost the whole length of the second
part, the whole of that second part has to be kept in the same interval as
they. The consolidation of the two occurrences of they thus precludes our
setting up two intervals here; otherwise we might have set up two intervals:
they prefer ... , and either they've used or Q've used.
On the other hand, there are cases where recognition of dependence leads
us to distinguish more intervals than we might otherwise. Take the sentence
Casals, who is self-exiled from Spain, stopped performing after the fascist
victory. If we investigate the text in which this is imbedded we will find that
the who is dependent upon Casals, much as the second they above is dependent upon the first: the text includes And the same Casals who ... , but later
The records which .... We may therefore say that the who 'contains' (fasals,
i.e. either continues it or repeats it. But which does it do? If who coJtinues
Casais, we have one interval, the first section (C) being Casals who, while the
second section (S) is is self-exiled ... stopped ... . If who repeats Casals instead
of continuing it, we have two intervals, one imbedded in the other: the first
consists of Casals (again C) plus stopped performing (marked Sl), the second
of who (taken as an equivalent of Casals) plus is self-exiled (S2)' We would be
led to the second choice only if we could show in terms of the text that is
self-exiled ... and stopped performing ... are two separate elements (not just
two portions of one long element) - for example, if we found in the text two
additional sentences: The press failed to say why he stopped performing, etc.
But he has stated publicly why he is self-exiled, etc. In either case who contains
Casa/s. But if the original sentence is Casals who S, we analyze it as C S,
whereas if (on the basis of the later sentences) we view the original sentence
as Casals who S2S1' we analyze it as C C S2 Sl, and divide it into two intervals C S2 and C S1> with the result that S2 and S1 are equivalent since they
both occur after C. The only difference between taking a dependent element
as a continuation and taking it as a repetition is in the number of intervals one or two - into which we then analyze the total.
We have seen here that when a sentence contains an element A which is
dependent upon B, we have the choice of taking the whole sentence as one
interval, with A simply a continuation of B, or as two intervals - one containing B and the other containing A in the same class as B. The latter choice
will generally be taken if the rest of the sentence can be divided into two
comparable sections, one to go with A and the other with B.

126

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

Choices of this type can arise even where there are no dependent forms.
For example, in our second text we have the further sentence The self-exiled
Casals is waiting across the Pyrenees for the fall of Franco. We wish to put
self-exiled in the same class as is self-exiled ... , since the same morphemes are
involved (provided we can show from the text itself that self-exiled is
equivalent to self-exiled from Spain). This gives us the peculiar sentence
structure S2 C S3, as compared with the previous C S sentences. Now if by
good fortune the text also contained the sentence Casals is waiting across the
Pyrenees for the fall of Franco (which is too much to ask in the way of
repetition), we would be in position to make the following analysis. We have
as sentences of the text C Sl' Cis S2, S2 C S3' C S3' The sequences Sl and
S2 and S3 are all members of one equivalence class S, since they all occur
after C. Our problem lies with the maverick S2 C S3' Let us now say that
any sentence Xl A X 2 can be 'transformed' into A is Xl: A X 2 .12 This means
that if Xl A X 2 occurs in the text, then A is Xl: A X 2 also occurs in the text.
In that case we will consider Xl A X 2 equivalent to A is Xl: A X 2 ; as a new
structure our maverick has disappeared. We replace S2 C S3 by the transformationally equivalent Cis S2 and C S3, both of which occur elsewhere in
the same text.
We may proceed on this basis even to transformations which are not
already justified by the text, provided they do not conflict with the text.
Thus, we find in the text the sentences The memorable concerts were recorded
in Prades ... The concerts were recordedfirst on tape. We can represent this as
M N R l : N R2 (the equivalence of Rl and R2 being shown, let us suppose,
elsewhere in the text), and we would transform the first sentence into N is
M: N R l • This does not mean that we claim that our transformation N is M
(The concerts were memorable) actually occurs in the text, or that there is no
stylistic or other difference between saying The memorable concerts were
recorded in Prades and saying The concerts were memorable: The concerts
(or They) were recorded ill Prades. All that our transformation means is that
M N Rl is taken as equivalent to N is M: N Rl because S2 C S3 is actually
found as an equivalent of C is S2: C S3, in the sense that both occur in the
modified text.
On the one hand, we have eliminated from our tabular arrangement the
peculiar interval structure M N Rl or S2 C S3 - peculiar because the other
intervals all have the form N R or C S. On the other hand, we have discovered that M (or rather is M) is a member of the R class. But our most
important result is that a sentence may be represented as two intervals even
when it does not contain two sets of the requisite equivalence classes. This
happens when we can show that a single class in the sentence relates independently to two other classes or elements elsewhere. That class is then

DISCOURSE ANALYSIS

127

repeated, once in each interval; and each interval will indicate separately its
relation to one of the other classes. 13
These difficulties in dividing a sentence into intervals arise from questions
about the manner in which the equivalence classes relate to each other. In a
sentence, the various morphemes or sequences do not merely occur together;
they usually have a specific relation to each other which can be expressed by
one or more morphemes of order: You wrote Paul and Paul wrote you differ
only in their morphemic order. If we find several C 8 intervals in our text,
that means that C has a particular relation to 8 - that of occurring with it
and before it. Since we are operating without meaning, we do not know what
this relation is, but we are careful to represent the same morphemic order in
the sentence by the same class order in the interval. Now when we find
8 2 C 8 3 , we do not know how this order relates to the order C 8, and we can
make no comparison of the two sentences. It is therefore desirable to
rearrange the unknown 8 2 C 8 3 so that it will contain the same classes in the
same order as other intervals - and of course we must show that the rearrangement is equivalent, for this text, to the original. In most cases this can
be done only if we break the unknown sentence, by means of such transformations as have been discussed above, into two or more intervals, in such
a way that the smaller intervals have a form which occurs in this text.
In this way we get a great number of structurally similar intervals even in
a text whose sentences are very different from each other.
2.33. Grammatical Transformations

Up to this point we have seen how the structure of a text can be investigated without using any information from outside the text itself. The
straightforward procedure is to set up equivalence classes, and to discover
patterned (i.e. similar or partly similar) combinations of these classes in
successive intervals of the text. Often, however, we get many small classes
and dissimilar intervals, because the sentences are so different from each
other; when this happens, we find that by comparing the sentences of the
text we can sometimes show that one section of one sentence is equivalent
(for this text) to a different section of another sentence, and therefore
contains the same classes. The extent to which we can do this depends upon
the amount of repetition in the text.
We raise now the question of advancing further in the same direction by
using information from outside the text. The information will be of the same
kind as we have sought inside the text, namely whether one section of a
sentence is equivalent to another (in the sense that M N R is equivalent to
N is M: N R). It will go back to the same basic operation, that of comparing
different sentences. And it will serve the same end: to show that two other-

128

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

wise different sentences contain the same combination of equivalence classes,
even though they may contain different combinations of morphemes. What
is new is only that we base our equivalence not on a comparison of two
sentences in the text, but on a comparison of a sentence in the text with
sentences outside the text.
This may seem to be a major departure. One may ask how we know that
any equivalence discovered in this way is applicable to our text. The justification was given in § 1.3 above: if we can show that two sequences are
equivalent in any English sentences in which they occur, then they are
equivalent in any text written in English. If in any English sentence containing X A Y, the X A Y is equivalent to A is X: A Y, then if we find S2 C S 3
in our English text we can say that it is equivalent to C is S2: C S3'
But what is 'equivalence'? Two ELEMENTS are equivalent if they occur in
the same environment within the sentence. Two SENTENCES in a text are
equivalent simply ifthey both occur in the text (unless we discover structural
details fine enough to show that two sentences are equivalent only if they
occur in similar structural positions in the text). Similarly, two sentences in a
language are equivalent if they both occur in the language. In particular, we
will say that sentences of the form A are equivalent to sentences of the form
B, if for each sentence A we can find a sentence B containing the same
morphemes except for differences due to the difference in form between A and
B. For example, NI V N2 is equivalent to N2 is V-en by NI because for any
sentence like Casals plays the cello we can find a sentence The cello is played
by Casals.

We do not claim that two equivalent sentences necessarily mean exactly
the same thing, or that they are stylistically indifferent. But we do claim that
not all sentences are equivalent in this sense: the relation of equivalence is
not useless, as it would be if it were true for all sentences. For example,
NI V N2 is not equivalent to NI is V-en by N 2 , because the latter form will be
found only for certain NI and N2 forms (J saw you and J was seen by you) but
not for all forms (we will not find Casals is played by the cello).14 We claim
further that the application of this grammatical equivalence from outside the
text will enable us to discover additional similar intervals in our text, beyond
what we could get merely from comparing the text sentences with each
other. Thus, we can show that in various environments who, he, etc. are
grammatically equivalent to the preceding noun, and that NI who VI V2 is
equivalent to NI V2 : Nl VI' Then, in Casals, who is self-exiled ... stopped
performing ... , we have two intervals C S1: Cis S2' We would have this result
(without having to worry whether Casals who is one continued occurrence of
C or two repeated occurrences) even if there were no other occurrences of
who within the text, i.e. when no analysis could be made of who on internal

DISCOURSE ANALYSIS

129

textual grounds. The usefulness of grammatical equivalence is especially
great if, for example, we have a number of intervals all containing Casals,
besides many others interlarded among the first but containing he, and if we
can find no common textual environments to show that Casals and he are
equivalent. As soon as we accept this equivalence grammatically, we can
show that all the environments of Casals are equivalent to those of he; and
this in turn can make other equivalences discoverable textually.
Grammatical equivalence can be investigated more systematically if we
introduce a technique of experimental variation. Given a sentence in form A
and a desired form B, we try to alter A by only the formal difference that
exists between it and B, and see what happens then to our A. Given The
memorable concerts were recorded ... , suppose that we want to make this
M N R sentence comparable in form to previous intervals beginning with N.
To this end, we seek a variation of the sentence beginning The concerts. We
may do this by putting an informant into a genuine social speech situation
(not a linguistic discussion about speech) in which he would utter a sentence
beginning The concerts and containing the words memorable and recorded. 15
Or we may do it by the tedious job of observation, hunting for a sentence that
begins with The concerts and contains memorable and recorded. By either
method, we might get The concerts were memorable and were recorded, or
something of the sort 16, whence we learn that when M (or any adjective)
is shifted to the other side of N (its following noun) one inserts is; M N is
equivalent to N is M. In this way we discover that when M N R is shifted
to a form beginning with N, an is appears between N and the following M.
This technique of varying the grammatical form of a sentence while
keeping its morphemes constant cannot be used within a text; for there all
we can do is to inspect the available material. But it can be used in the
language outside the text, where we have the right, as speakers, to create any
social situation which might favor another speaker's uttering one rather than
another of the many sentences at his disposal. It is especially useful in a
language like English, where so many morphemes occur in various grammatical classes.
The preceding paragraph indicates the basic safeguard in applying
grammatical equivalence to extend our textual equivalence classes. We do
not merely ask, What sentence-forms are equivalent to M N R? There may
be many. We ask instead, Since N ... is a common form in this text, and
since we find also M N R, can we replace this by an equivalent sentence of
the form N ... ? The direction of change is not arbitrary, but comes entirely
from the text. As before, it is a matter of dividing our sentences into the
most similar intervals possible All we ask is whether there is a grammatical
equivalence which would connect M N R with the form N ... ; the answer is

130

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATION AL LINGUISTICS

yes, provided an is appears in the form. This in turn yields is M as equivalent
to R. As elsewhere in linguistics, the method does not collapse all sentences
into any arbitrary form we choose; it simply enables us to describe the rarer
forms of the text (M N R) in terms of the common ones (N ... ).
For analysis purely within the text, all we need to know are the morpheme
boundaries. To utilize grammatical equivalences we need to know also the
morpheme class to which each morpheme in our text belongs, since grammatical statements concern classes rather than individual morphemes. The
grammatical statement in this instance is that adjective + noun is equivalent
to noun+is+adjective; to apply it to our sequence M N, we must know that
the M is an adjective and the N a noun.
It has been found empirically that a relatively small number of grammatical equivalences are called upon, time after time, in reducing the
sentences of a text to similar intervals. Hence even a non-linguist can get
considerable information about the text by using (in addition to the internal
textual method) a prepared list of major grammatical equivalences for the
language. Some frequently used equivalences are given here, without any
evidence for their validity, and with only a very rough indication of the
sentence-environments in which they hold 17:
(1) If we find XC Y, then X = Y (X is equivalent to Y). The C is a conjunction like and, but, or, or else, under special circumstances, a phrase like
as well as, rather than, A-er than. The X and Y must be in the same grammatical class. Thus, in I phoned him but he was out, X and Yare each N V; in
I saw it but went on, the Y is only the verb phrase went on, and hence the X
can include only the verb phrase saw it (not the whole sequence I saw it). It
follows that NI VI C N2 V2 is equivalent to two intervals NI VI: N2 V2 , and
N VI C V 2=N VI: N V2.
(2) The sequence NI is N2 indicates that NI = N2. The class of is includes
remains and other verbs.
(3) NI N2 , with a primary stress on each N, indicates that NI = N 2 ; e.g.
The pressure P increases is eq uivalent to The pressure increases and P increases.
(4) N V (that) N V=N V: N V; e.g. I telegraphed that we'll arrive tomorrow is equivalent to I telegraphed: We'll arrive tomorrow.
(5) NI V N2 = N2 V* Nl , where V and V* are respectively active and
passive, or passive and active.
(6) NI P N2 = N2 P* Nt; e.g. (They seek) the goal of certainty is equivalent
to some such form as (They seek) certainty as a goal. The change in prepositions when two nouns are reversed is far greater than the corresponding
change in verbs. In verbs the change is effected simply by adding or subtracting the passive morpheme and the word by; in prepositions it is effected
by replacing one form by an entirely different form. The pairs of equivalent

DISCOURSE ANALYSIS

131

prepositions are not fixed: between certain nouns, the substitute for of may
be as; between others it may be with. Nevertheless, it is possible to find structures in which the nouns of the sequence Nt P N2 are reversed.
(7) Nl P Nl =A2 Nt. i.e. the morpheme of the second noun occurs in an
adjectival form before the prior noun, as in medical training for training in
medicine.
(8) Pronouns like he, and certain words with initial wh- and th-, repeat a
preceding noun. Which noun they repeat (when there are several nouns
preceding) depends on the details of the grammatical environment; usually
it is the immediately preceding noun, or the last noun that occurs in a comparable grammatical environment. Thus, who = the man in The man who
phoned left no name (N who Vl V2 = N V2 : N Vl ); who = my roommate in The
man spoke to my room-mate, who told him to call again (Nt VI N z who
V1 = Nl Vl N 2 : N z V1 ). There are many variant ways of determining which
noun is repeated by a pronoun, and which verb belongs with each noun. In
the man who phoned, no subject can be inserted before phoned, hence who
must be taken as subject. In The man I phoned was out, we reduce first to I
phoned: The man was out; then, since no object can be inserted after phoned
in the original sentence, we set the man as the object 18 of phoned and obtain
the equivalent I phoned the man: The man was out (NI N2 Vt V2 = N2 Vt Nt:
Nt Vz)·
(9) N VI, V2-ing=N VI: N Vz ; e.g. They escaped, saving nothing is equivalent to They escaped: They saved nothing.
(10) NI C N z V X = Nt V N 1 : Nl V Nt. Here X represents a class of crossreference expressions like each other; e.g. The Giants and the Dodgers each
beat the other twice is equivalent to The D beat the G twice: The G beat the D
twice. The equivalence differs somewhat for different groups of X forms.
(I I) A N V = N is A: N V, as in the example The self-exiled Casals ... in
§ 2.32 .. So also N V ANI =N V Nt who is A=N V Nt: Nt is A; e.g. They
read the interdicted books = They read the books which were interdicted =
They read the books: The books were interdicted.
(I2) Nt V N z P N3 = Nt V N z : NI V P N 3 • That is, a double object can be
replaced by two separate objects in two intervals which repeat the subject
and verb; e.g. I bought it: I bought for you for I bought it for you.
These grammatical equivalences preserve the morphemes and the grammatical relations among them, though in a changed grammatical form. We
cannot get Nt V N z = N z V N I , because that would change the subjectobject relation to the verb; but N z V * Nt is obtainable as an equivalent of
NI V N z because the verb too is changed here, in a way that preserves its
grammatical relation to the now reversed nouns. Preservation of the grammatical relations is essential, because such relations are always to be found

132

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

among the morphemes in a sentence. That is to say, there are restrictions of
substitutability and order and intonation among the various morphemes (or
morpheme classes) in a sentence; and when we move from one sentence to an
equivalent sentence, we want upon moving back to the original sentence to
get back the same restrictions - since the original, like all sentences, is
defined by the restrictions among its parts. Therefore, when we break up a
sentence into various intervals for a tabular arrangement, we do not want
two combinations of the same equivalence classes (say our first and second
T E combinations above) to represent different grammatical relations.
Accordingly, when we transform a sentence containing certain equivalence
classes, we are careful to preserve the original grammatical relations among
them.
Sometimes, however, we find sections of a sentence which contain none of
our equivalence classes; that is (in the simplest case), they contain no material
which recurs elsewhere in the text. The grammatical relation of unique
sections to the rest of the sentence must be preserved in our tabular arrangement no less than the relation of recurrent sections; but here we
escape the problem of preserving their relation while changing their relative
position, since we have no reason to change their position at all: it is only
our equivalence classes that we wish to rearrange. All we want of this nonrecurrent material is to know its relation to our equivalence classes, and to
indicate this relation in our analysis. We may not be able to learn this from
a study of our text alone; but we can learn it by bringing in grammatical
information or experimental variation. For an example we return to the
sequences Casals, who is self-exiledfrom Spain ... and The self-exiled Casals ....
If the latter is S 2 C, the former is C, C is S 2 from Spain. Since from Spain
does not recur, we want only to know where to keep it when we arrange our
equivalence classes, i.e. what its relation is to these classes. From the grammar
we know that in sentences in the form N V A P N the smallest unit of which
P N is an immediate constituent is A P N, and that this A P N is replaceable
by A alone. 19 Therefore, if the A happens to be a member of one of our
equivalence classes while the P N is not, we associate the P N with the A in
its equivalence column by writing A P N instead of A as the member of the
class.
More generally, material that does not belong to any equivalence class,
but is grammatically tied to a member of some class, is included with that
member to form with it an expanded member of the class in question. Thus,
self-exiled from Spain is now in the same class as self-exiled. The justification
for this is that since the material does not occur again in this text (or occurs
again only in the same grammatical relation to the same equivalence class),
its only effect, when the text is represented in terms of particular equivalence

DISCOURSE ANALYSIS

133

classes, is precisely its relation to the particular member to which it is
grammatically tied.
An interesting special case arises when two members of the same equivalence class constitute jointly the next larger grammatical unit of their
sentence (i.e. are the immediate constituents of that unit), for example when
the two are an adjective and a following noun, where A N = N. In such a case
we may consider that the two together constitute just one member of their
class, and fit together into a single interval. If we took them as two occurrences of their class, we would have to put each occurrence into a separate
interval.
Grammatical information is especially useful in the recognition of sentence
connectives. These morphemes are easily identified from formal grammar,
quite independently of their meaning, but may not be identifiable as such on
purely textual evidence. Their importance lies in the fact that many sentences
of a text may contain the same classes except for some unassigned words,
often at the beginning, which are grammatically connecters or introducers of
sentences; they stand outside the specific classes which comprise the sentence
or interval. In our tabular arrangement these elements can be assigned, by
their grammatical position, to a special front column. We can go beyond this
and assign to this front column any material which is not assignable to any
of the equivalence columns. Sometimes such connecting material is not
immediately obvious; note that many sentences of the form N V that NI VI
can be analyzed as consisting of the equivalence classes NI VI' with the N V
that relegated to the front column. Consider, for example, We are proud that
these concerts were recorded by our engineers. Here the known members of
equivalence classes are concerts and recorded. The preceding words do not
recur in the text and are not grammatically tied to any particular class
member. Quite the contrary, they can be grammatically replaced by introductory adverbs like indeed, even though in a purely grammatical sense
they are the major subject and predicate of the sentence.
In addition to making use of the grammatical relations of whole grammatical classes, we can use information about the relation of particular morphemes or grammatical subclasses to grammatical classes. For instance, it is
possible to establish that intransitive verbs (in some languages) form a
subclass which never occurs with an object and which is equivalent to a
transitive verb plus an object. In a given text, this may enable us to put a
transitive verb with its object in the same column as a comparably placed
intransitive verb.
Finally, there are a great many detailed equivalences which apply to
particular morphemes. This information is not provided by descriptive
linguistics, which deals generally with whole morpheme classes. But it can be

134

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

obtained by linguistic methods, since it deals with matched occurrences and
special restrictions, though in most cases it is necessary to study the restrictions over more than one sentence at a time. Suppose, for example, that
we find the words buy and sell in a text. Their environments in that text may
not be sufficiently similar to place them in the same equivalence class, even
though it might promote the analysis of the text if we could do so. But if we
investigate a good number of other short texts in which the two words occur,
we will find that the two often appear in matched environments, and that in
certain respects they are distributional inverses of each other; that is, we will
find many sequences like Nl buys from N 2 : N2 sells to N1 (I bought it from
him at the best price I could get, but he still sold it to me at a profit). If the
environments of buy and sell in our text are similar to the matched environments of the other short texts, we may be able, by comparison with
these wider results, to put the two into one equivalence class in our text
after all, or even to analyze one as the inverse of the other.
In this way we can put more words into one textual class than would
otherwise be possible, and we can make use of what would seem to be special
semantic connections between words (as between buy and sell, or even
between a transitive verb and the presence of an object) without departing
from a purely formal study of occurrences. The reason is that differences in
meaning correlate highly with differences in linguistic distribution; and if
we have two related words whose distributional similarities cannot be
shown within the confines of our text, we will often be able to show them in
a larger selection of texts, even of very short ones.
The kind of outside information which has been indicated here has been
only sketched in scattered examples, both because the field is vast and
because a great deal remains to be done. Further work in this direction will
not only be useful to discourse analysis but will also have interest as an
extension of descriptive linguistics.

3. RESULTS
3.1. The Double Array
As a product of discourse analysis we obtain a succession of intervals, each
containing certain equivalence classes. For a tabular arrangement we write
each interval under the preceding one, with the successive members of each
class forming a column, as in § 2.14 above. The very brief text of § 2.32 is
arranged as follows. 20

C S1
C

S2

(S2 after C is is S2)

DISCOURSE ANALYSIS

135

C S2 (=S2 C without the is)
C S3
N Ro (=M N; Ro=is M)
N Rl
N R2
The horizontal rows show the equivalence classes present in each interval, arranged according to their order (or other relation) within the interval. The
vertical columns indicate the particular members of each class which appear
in the successive intervals. Material which is a member of no equivalence
class, but is grammatically tied to a particular member of some class, is
included with that member in its column; thus in Spain is included in the
first S2' Material which is a member of no equivalence class, and is not
grammatically tied to a particular member of some class, is placed in a front
column (not illustrated here), which will be found to include morphemes that
relate the sentences or intervals to each other, or mark some change in
several classes of a single interval. The tabular arrangement thus represents
the original one-dimensional text in a two-dimensional array, where each
element has two coordinates: one horizontal, in respect to the other elements
of its interval, and one vertical, in respect to the other members of its class.
This double array can be viewed as representing the whole text, since every
morpheme of the text is assigned to one class or another in the array, and
since the array preserves the relations among the morphemes. Even when a
large number of textual and grammatical transformations have been carried
out, the classes and their members are defined at each step in such a way that
the text can always be reproduced from the array plus the full definition of
the classes in it. The individual intervals in the array may not be 'idiomatic' that is, they may not naturally occur in speech. But the preservation of
idiom is not one of the requirements of our method. All we ask is that the
succession of intervals should be textually and grammatically equivalent to
the original text. Although the array may suggest a critique or a possible
improvement of the text, it is not meant to be used instead of the original.
The double array can also be viewed as indicating the purely distributional
relations among the equivalence classes which figure in it. From this viewpoint we can operate upon the tabular arrangement and investigate its
properties. We can develop ways of simplifying the array, for example by
drawing out common elements, or by grouping together larger sets of
equivalent sequences than we used in the formation of the array. We can
learn how to accommodate various special cases, such as a mobile class which
appears in close relation now with one class now with another, or which
appears a different number of times in various intervals. We can try to

136

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

regularize or 'normalize' the array by matching all the intervals, so as to
establish a single 'normal' interval with which all the actual intervals can be
compared: for instance, given an interval from which one of the classes is
absent, we can try to transform it into one that includes all the classes,
preserving equivalence during the transformation. We can attempt to
formulate a general statement covering the changes in successive members of
a class as we go down a column, in a effort to 'explain' or 'predict' the
particular form taken by the classes of each interval - that is, to derive the
successive intervals from the normal form.
All such operations with the array have the effect of isolating the most
general independent elements in terms of which we can describe the text
(ultimately the horizontal and vertical axes), and of bringing out their
relations to each other in the text. In this sense all such operations are but
further refinements of our initial procedures.
3.2. Findings
Various conclusions can be drawn about a particular text or type of text by
studying the properties of its double array, either directly or in its most
simplified forms. Many of these conclusions may well have been obtainable
intuitively without such formal analysis; but intuition does not yield results
that are either explicit or rigorous. In some respects, moreover, the complexity and size of the material make it impossible for us to draw all the
relevant conclusions without painstaking formal analysis. The sample texts
used in the present paper have been necessarily too short and too simple to
show what kind of conclusions the analysis yields about a particular text or
style; that must be left for a future presentation of a longer sample text,
though the details of method and the range of conclusions obtainable by
means of it could be shown only through the analysis of a great many
discourses. To give some slight idea of these conclusions, we will complete
here the analysis of our first text (§ 2.2).
The analysis was left at the following point: P has as members Millions,
Four out offive people in a nationwide survey, You too will, (and) your whole
family will. Whas as members can't be wrong, prefer x- to any hair tonic ...
've used. Four of the sentences (including the title) are represented by five
P W intervals.
At this point it is difficult to proceed without recourse to grammatical
equivalence (see note 11). In Four out of five ... say they prefer ... we have P
and W but with say they intervening. If our text happened to contain they
and four out of five ... in equivalent environments, we could analyze this
sentence directly. In the absence of this, we appeal to the grammatical
equivalence of they with the preceding comparably-situated noun: four out

DISCOURSE AN AL YSIS

137

offive ... as subject of say, parallel to they as subject of prefer. We therefore
put they into the same class P asfour out offive. Then the sentence becomes P
say P W, which is analyzed as two intervals P say: P W, on the basis of the
formula N V (that) N V=N V: N V; and on this basis say is a member of W,
since it occurs after P to make a whole interval.
We now turn to the last sentence: You too will be satisfied. The first part is a
known P; hence be satisfied is included in W. This gives us a start for working
on the preceding sentence, Every year we sell more bottles of X-to satisfied
consumers. Now X- to satisfied consumers is grammatically X- to A N, which
is equivalent to X- to N: N is A. In this way we obtain an interval consumers
are satisfied; and since the second part of this is W, we place consumers in P.
The rest of the sentence contains new classes: Since bottles occurs elsewhere
in the text, we regard it as representing a possible equivalence class and mark
it B; with this occurrence of B we associate the word more, which does not
occur elsewhere and which is gra~matically tied to bottles. Since sell occurs
elsewhere in sold (=sell+part of the passive morpheme), we mark it S; and
we associate with it every year, which is grammatically tied to it. (Every year
is similar in only one morpheme to since ... years ago in the first sentence;
rather than try to get these phrases into new equivalence classes, we note
that each is tied to the member of S that occurs near it, and we associate
each phrase with its member of S). There remains we, which is not grammatically part of either the B phrase or the S phrase; even though it seems
not to occur again, we place it tentatively in a new class 1. (We will see
below that a zero form of I may be said to occur in the first sentence.) Thus
we get I S B to P. This in turn can be somewhat simplified, since it is grammatically equivalent to IS B: I S to P.
Finally there is the first sentence, Millions of consumer bottles of X- have
been sold since its introduction a few years ago. If we start with Millions as a
known P, we obtain an unanalyzable remainder beginning with of Instead,
we match bottles of X-have been sold with we sell bottles of X -. The first has
the form Nt V; the second is N2 V Nt. Grammatically, have been sold is
sell + past + passive; hence if we take sell as V, then been sold is V*. Grammatically also, V + passive + by N is equivalent to V + passive alone (is sold
by us = is sold). Hence the lack of any by us after sold does not prevent our
matching the two clauses. To we sell bottles as N2 V Nt we match bottles have
been sold as Nt V* = Nt V* N 2 ; we can even say that the passive morpheme,
with or without the following 'agent' (by + N) is equivalent to the subject of the
active verb (i.e. the verb without the passive morpheme). If we sell bottles of
X- is IS B, then bottles of X- have been sold is the equivalent B S* I with
zero 1. The section since ... years ago we associate with the preceding S*, as
also the past-tense morpheme, since neither of these figures elsewhere in our

138

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

equivalence classes. Millions and consumer are both members of p21, but
there is no way of making use of this fact. Grammatically, consumer bottles
is Nt N z =Nz , and millions of N2 is N3 P N2 =N2 , so that the whole sequence
is grammatically tied to bottles (as more was tied to bottles above), leaving
the sentence as B S* I. This means that there are two occurrences of P
words which are lost by being included in an occurrence of B. There is no
other distributional relation that this Millions and this consumer have to any
other class occurrence in the text (except their analogy to more); hence there
is no way of including them in the double array. The same morphemes indeed
occur elsewhere as P, but in different relations to other classes.
This points up the confusing relation of the title to the first sentence. If we
start with the title, we come upon Millions in the first sentence and assign it to
P, on the basis of the title, only to find that there is no class P in the final
analysis of the sentence. (The millions who can't be wrong turn out to be
bottles. 22) If we begin with the body of the advertisement, we have a class P
(four out offive; you) which relates to W, and a class B (bottles, millions of...
bottles) which relates to S; and if we then proceed to the title, we find there
the W preceded not by any known P word or by a new word which we can
assign to P, but by a word which has elsewhere been associated with a
member of B. (The bottles show up as people.) This is the formal finding
which parallels what one might have said as a semantic critique - namely,
that the text of the advertisement (millions of bottles sold; many people
cannot be wrong in preferring X-) fails to support the title (millions cannot
be wrong).
The double array for the advertisement is not interesting in itself:
Millions of People Can't Be Wrong!
PW
B S* I (the B containing pseudo-P) Millions of consumer
bottles ... have been sold ...
And four out offive people ... say
CPW
they
prefer X- ...
PW
Four out of five people ... can't be wrong.
PW
You too will prefer X- .. .
PW
PW
your whole family will prefer X- ...
B S* 1(=1 S B) Every year we sell more bottles of XS* I to P
we sell to consumers
consumers are satisfied
PW
You too will be satisfied!
PW

3.3. Interpretations
The formal findings of this kind of analysis do more than state the distribution

DISCOURSE ANALYSIS

139

of classes, or the structure of intervals, or even the distribution of interval
types. They can also reveal peculiarities within the structure, relative to the
rest of the structure. They can show in what respects certain structures are
similar or dissimilar to others. They can lead to a great many statements
about the text.
All this, however, is still distinct from an INTERPRETATION of the findings,
which must take the meanings of the morphemes into consideration, and ask
what the author was about when he produced the text. Such interpretation is
obviously quite separate from the formal findings, although it may follow
closely in the directions which the formal findings indicate.
Even the formal findings can lead to results of broader interest than that of
the text alone. The investigation of various types of textual structure can
show correlations with the person or the situation of its origin, entirely
without reference to the meanings of the morphemes. It can also show what
are the inherent or the removable weaknesses (from some given point of
view) of a particular type of structure. It can find the same kinds of structure
present in different texts, and may even show how a particular type of
structure can serve new texts or non-linguistic material.
Finally, such investigation performs the important task of indicating what
additional intervals can be joined to the text without changing its structure.
It is often possible to show that if, to the various combinations of classes that
are found in the existing intervals of the text, we add intervals with certain
new combinations of classes, the description of the textual structure becomes
simpler, and exceptions are removed (provided we leave intact any intrinsic
exceptions, such as boundary conditions). The adding of such intervals may
regularize the text from the point of view of discourse analysis. Iffor example
our text contains A B: A C: Z B, we may say that Z is secondarily equivalent
to A, since both occur before B, but only A before C. If there are no textually
intrinsic exceptions governing this restriction on Z, we can on this basis add
the interval Z C to the text. In this extended text the equivalence A = Z is now
a matter of complete substitutability in an identical range of environments,
rather than just the secondary result of a chain of equivalences. The addition
of such intervals has a very different standing from the addition of arbitrary
intervals to the text. If we want to know what is implied but not explicitly
stated in a given text, or if we want to see what more can be derived from a
given text than the author has already included, this search for adjoinable
intervals becomes important.
4. SUMMARY

Discourse analysis performs the following operations upon any single connected text. It collects those elements (or sequences of elements) which have

140

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

identical or equivalent environments of other elements within a sentence, and
considers these to be equivalent to each other (i.e. members of the same
equivalence class). Material which does not belong to any equivalence class
is associated with the class member to which it is grammatically most closely
tied. The sentences of the text are divided into intervals, each a succession of
equivalence classes, in such a way that each resulting interval is maximally
similar in its class composition to other intervals of the text. The succession of
intervals is then investigated for the distribution of classes which it exhibits,
in particular for the patterning of class occurrence.
The operations make no use of any knowledge concerning the meaning of
the morphemes or the intent or conditions of the author. They require only a
knowledge of morpheme boundaries, including sentence junctures and other
morphemic intonations (or punctuation). Application of these operations
can be furthered by making use of grammatical equivalences (or individual
morpheme occurrence relations) from the language as a whole, or from the
linguistic body of which the given text is a part. In that case it is necessary to
know the grammatical class of the various morphemes of the text.
Discourse analysis yields considerable information about the structure of a
text or a type of text, and about the role that each element plays in such a
structure. Descriptive linguistics, on the other hand, tells only the role that
each element plays in the structure of its sentence. Discourse analysis tells,
in addition, how a discourse can be constructed to meet various specifications,
just as descriptive linguistics builds up sophistication about the ways in
which linguistic systems can be constructed to meet various specifications.
It also yields information about stretches of speech longer than one sentence;
thus it turns out that while there are relations among successive sentences,
these are not visible in sentence structure (in terms of what is subject and
what is predicate, or the like), but in the pattern of occurrence of equivalence
classes through successive sentences.
NOTES
1 It is a pleasure to acknowledge here the cooperation of three men who have collaborated
with me in developing the method and in analyzing various texts: Fred Lukolf, Noam
Chomsky, and A. F. Brown. Earlier investigations in the direction of this method have
been presented by Lukolf, Preliminary analysis of the linguistic structure of extended
discourse, University of Pennsylvania Library (1948). A detailed analysis of a sample text
will appear in a future number of Lg.
2 Correlations between personality and language are here taken to be not merely related
to correlations between 'culture' and language, but actually a special case of these. The
reason for this view is that most individual textual characteristics (as distinguished from
phonetic characteristics) correlate with those personality features which arise out of the
individual's experience with socially conditioned interpersonal situations.
3 When the verb is transformed to suit such an inversion of subject (Nl above) and object

DISCOURSE ANALYSIS

141

(Nz), we may call the new verb form the conjugate of the original form. and write it V·.
Then an active verb has a passive verb as its conjugate, and a passive verb has an active
verb as its conjugate.
4 Two personal names may have identical distributions. Thus, for every sentence containing Bill we may find an otherwise identical sentence containing Jim instead.
5 lowe a clarification of the use of such chains to the unpublished work of Noam Chomsky.
6 Mathematics, and to a greater extent logic, have already set up particular sentence orders
which are equivalent to each other. This equivalence can be rediscovered linguistically by
finding that the distribution of each sequence is equivalent to that of the others. Our
interest here, however, is to discover other equivalences than those which we already
know to have been explicitly built into a system.
7 This is the actual text of an advertisement, found on a card which had presumably been
attached to a bottle of hair tonic. A considerable number of advertisements have been
analyzed, because they offer repetitive and transparent material which is relatively easy
to handle at this stage of our experience with discourse analysis. Many other kinds of texts
have been analyzed as well - sections of textbooks, conversations, essays, and so on; and
a collection of these will be published soon.
8 This will be true, though to a lesser extent, even in the writing of those who obey the
school admonition to use synonyms instead of repeating a word. In such cases the synonyms will often be found in the same environments as the original not-to-be-repeated word.
In contrast, when a writer has used a different word because he intends the particular
difference in meaning expressed by it, the synonym will often occur in correspondingly
different environments from the original word.
9 cr. Harris, Methods in Structural Linguistics, Chicago 1951, 160. (The fourth impression
appeared under the title Structural Linguistics in 1960.) It goes without saying that this
vague use of foresight is a preliminary formulation. Detailed investigations will show what
may be expected from different kinds of equivalence chains, and will thus make possible
a more precise formulation of safeguards.
10 The -s is also a part of all singular nouns (The child walk-s, etc.). Or else walks, goes,
and the like can be taken as alternants of walk, go, etc. after he and singular nouns.
11 Before this can be done, some further operations must be carried out to reduce Four
out offive ... say they prefer ... to two PWsequences: Four ... say ... and They prefer ... ,
with the sentence You ... will prefer ... as a third PW sequence. Otherwise, the words say
they would be left hanging, since the P section (equivalent to Millions) is only Four out of
five people in a nationwide survey, and the corrected W section (identical with the W of
You ... will prefer ... ) is only prefer X- to any hair tonic Q've used. See § 3.2 below.
12 In such formulas as A is Xl: AX2, the italic colon indicates the end of a sentence or
interval. (It is used instead of a period because that might be mistaken for the period at
the end of a sentence in the author's exposition.)
13 The case which we have been considering here is the important one of the sequence
adjective + noun + verb, in which the noun relates independently to the adjective and to
the verb. The adjective can be represented as a predicate of the noun in the same way as
the verb. This will be discussed in § 2.33 below.
14 True, one might claim that this last sentence is still 'grammatical'. But present-day
grammar does not distinguish among the various members of a morpheme class. Hence
to require that sentence B must contain the same morphemes as sentence A is to go beyond
grammar in the ordinary sense.
15 To give a crude example, one can read the text sentence The memorable concerts were
recorded in company with an informant, and then stop and say to him, in an expectant
and hesitant way, 'That is to say, the concerts--', waiting for him to supply the continuation.
16 We may find a great many sentences beginning with The concerts and containing the
other two words, e.g. The concerts were not memorable but were nevertheless recorded. These
sentences will contain various words in addition to those of the original sentence; but the
only new word which will occur in ALL sentences of the desired form N M R (or rather in

142

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

a subclass of the N M R sentences) will be a form of the verb to be. Hence this is the only
new word that is essential when changing to that form.
17 A for adjective, N for noun, V for verb, P for preposition. Subscripts indicate particular
morphemes, regardless of their class.
18 The only way to express the exclusion of an object here purely in terms of occurrence
of elements is to say that the object already occurs. This cannot be I, since that is the
subject of phoned; hence it must be the other N, the man.
19 Semantically one would say that the PN'modifies' the A.
20 The array given here represents the following sentences, taken from a review of some
recent phonograph records: Casals, who is self-exiled from Spain, stopped performing after
the fascist victory .. , The self-exiled Casals is waiting across the Pyrenees for the fall of
Franco ... The memorable concerts were recorded in Prades ... The concerts were recorded
first on tape. (The other sentences analyzed in § 2.32 were composed by me for comparison
with these.) The sentences do not represent a continuous portion of the text. This fact
limits very materially the relevance of the double array; but that does not concern us here,
since the array is intended only as an example of how such arrangements are set up.
21 We have consumers in P; and since the singular-plural distinction does not figure in our
classes, we can associate the dropping of the -s with the occurrence of consumers in the
first sentence. By dropping the -s from the P-element consumers we get a P-form consumer
for the sentence.
22 Since millions of consumers would be a natural English phrase (PI of P2 = P2), the effect
of using the almost identical sequence millions of consumer in front of bottles is to give a
preliminary impression that the sentence is talking about P; but when one reaches the
word bottles one sees that the subject of the sentence is B, with the P words only adjectival
to B.

8

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMATION
IN LINGUISTIC STRUCTURE

o. SUMMARY
This paper defines a formal relation among sentences, by virtue of which one
sentence structure may be called a transform of another sentence structure
(e.g. the active and the passive, or in a different way question and answer).
The relation is based on comparing the individual co-occurrences of morphemes. By investigating the individual co-occurrences (§ 1.2; § 2) we can
characterize the distribution of certain classes which may not be definable in
ordinary linguistic terms (e.g. pronouns, § 2.6). More important, we can then
proceed to define transformation (§ 1.3), based on two structures having the
same set of individual co-occurrences. This relation yields unique analyses of
certain structures and distinctions which could not be analyzed in ordinary
linguistic terms (§ 3). It replaces a large part of the complexities of constituent
analysis and sentence structure, at the cost of adding a level to grammatical
analysis. It also has various analytic and practical applications (§ 5.7), and
can enter into a more algebraic analysis of language structure (§ 5.2, 4, 6)
than is natural for the usual classificatory linguistics. A list of English
transformations is given in § 4. The main argument can be followed in § 1.11
(Co-Occurrence Defined), § 1.2 (Constructional Status), § 1.3 (Transformation Defined), § 2.9 (Summary of Constructions), § 3.9 (Summary of
Sentence Sequences), § 5 (The Place of Transformations in Linguistic
Structure).l
1. THE METHOD OF ANALYSIS

1.1. Individual Co-Occurrence
The range of individual co-occurrence of a morpheme (or word) i is defined
first of all as the environment of morphemes (or words) which occur in the
same sentences with i (in some body of linguistic material). This is indeed the
initial information available for morphological structure. Given utterances
or sentences and given the morphemes, we can say that each morpheme i has
Presidential address, Linguistic Society of America, 1955. Language 33, No.3 (1957),
283-340.

143

144

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

the particular morphemes j, k, ... as co-occurrents in the sentences in which i
appears. Each morpheme has a unique set of co-occurrents (except for
special morphemes such as some paradigmatic affixes which all occur with
the same set of words and in the same sentences).
The individuality of morphemes in this respect makes it difficult to set up
any compact description of a language. However, some morphemes have
very similar (though not identical) sets of co-occurrents: thus, the set of
co-occurrents for cloth - e.g. The ( ) tore, The ( ) was torn, Get me a ( )
quick-may have many morphemes in common with the set for paper,
certainly many more than with the set for diminish. This suggests that
morphemes can be grouped into classes in such a way that members of a class
have rather similar sets of co-occurrents, and each class in turn occurs with
specific other classes to make a sentence structure. In structural linguistics
this classification is not set up on the basis of relative similarity of cooccurrents, but rather on the basis of a particular choice of diagnostic cooccurrents: cloth and paper both occur, say, in the environment the ( ) is
(i.e. after the and before is), where diminish does not appear; we call this
class N. And diminish and grow both occur, say, in It will ( ), where paper
and cloth do not; we calI this class V. The diagnostic environments (stretches
of co-occurrents) are chosen in such a way that the resulting classes permit
compact statements about co-occurrence. For example, cloth, paper,
diminish, grow all show some differences in their environments, so that no
simple summary can be made. But in terms of the classes N and V we can
say that every N occurs before some V in the environment the ( ) V, and
every V occurs in the environment the N ( ) for some N.
When we proceed to describe the structure of sentences (i.e. the choices of
morphemes that occur in a sentence) in terms of these classes, we find that
the work is of manageable proportions. In the sentences of any given
language, only certain sequences of classes (set up as above for that language)
will be found; and these sequences which constitute the sentences can be
described as the products of a small number of elementary class sequences
(constructions) which are combined in certain stateable ways; for instance,
the class sequence T N P N V (The fear of war grew) results from the elementary class sequences T N V and N P N by the substitution operation
N P N = N. 2 This compact description of sentence structure in terms of
sequences of classes is obtained, however, at a cost: statements such as
N P N = N or 'T N V is a sentence structure' do not mean that all members
of N P N have been found in the same environments as all members of N,
or that all sequences of members of T, N, and V in that order have been
found as sentences.
On the other hand, to describe a language in terms of the co-occurrences

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMA nON

145

of the individual morphemes is virtually impossible: almost each morpheme
has a unique set of co-occurrents; the set varies with individual speakers and
with time (whereas the class combinations are relatively permanent); it is in
general impossible to Qbtain a complete list of co-occurrents for any morpheme; and in many cases a speaker is uncertain whether or not he would
include some given morpheme as a co-occurrent of some other one. Individual co-occurrence is thus not just the limiting case of morpheme classes,
where the number of members per class is one. Classes are essentially
different because they are defined by a diagnostic environment, chosen to
yield a class-sequence structure. 3
1.11. It follows that individual co-occurrence cannot be used, as indeed it
has not been used, as the basic element of morphological construction. Even
for discussions of individual co-occurrence itself, it is convenient to use the
framework of classes and constructions. This leads now to an adjusted
definition: For classes K, L in a construction c, the K-co-occurrence of a
particular member L j of L is the set of members of K which occur with L j
in c: For example, in the A N construction found in English grammar, the
A-co-occurrence of hopes (as N) includes slight (slight hopes of peace) but
probably not green. The K-co-occurrence of L j is not necessarily the same in
two different K L constructions: the N-co-occurrents of man (as N j ) in N;
is a N may include organism, beast, development, searcher, while the N-cooccurrents of man in Nj's N may include hopes, development, imagination,
etc.
1.2. Constructional Status

Although, as we have seen, individual co-occurrence cannot be used directly
in discovering morphological relations, we do not have to disregard it (as we
do in structural linguistics). In spite of the impossibility of obtaining complete or definite co-occurrence data, we can still consider various indirect
questions (absolute or relative), such as whether a particular morpheme or
class has some special property in its co-occurrence set, or how the co-occurrence sets of two classes or class sequences compare. Such questions can fit
into the class structure because each co-occurrence check would be within
stated classes and constructions (by the adjusted definition); and the results
can be then phrased as new statements, again about classes and constructions,
as will be seen below. From the point of view of structural linguistics, this
amounts to asking one of the few types of outside questions that are still
relevant to it, for these are questions which are couched in terms of the raw
data of structural morphology (the occurrence of morphemes in sentences),
and which lead to additional information about inter-class relations, yet
which had not been asked in the original study of class environments.

146

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

Individual co-occurrences can be expressed in structural terms by saying
that they are the values for which a structural formula is satisfied. That is, if
we regard each statement about constructions (N P N = N, or T N V = S) as
a formula which holds when particular morphemes (or sequences of them)
occur in the positions indicated by their class marks, then we can say that
the particular combinations of morphemes which co-occur in various
instances of a construction are those which satisfy it (i.e. those for which the
formula holds).4
We consider now the major applications of individual co-occurrence data
within constructional morphology.
Given a construction (which is recognized by its place within larger constructions, up to a sentence), we can see some relations or different statuses
among the participating classes by noting details of class occurrence for each
class. For example, given the A N construction (slight hopes), we note that it
is substitutable for N alone but not for A alone: both slight hopes and hopes
occur in Their ( ) faded. We can express the constructional equivalence
AN = N by defining in the place of these two a composite construction (A)N,
with the parentheses indicating occasional omission; and in this new
construction we can say that N is the 'head', meaning that it always is present
when the construction occurs. Another kind of differential status for the
classes in a construction is seen when one class has a correlation between its
subclasses and some other element in or out ofthe construction (grammatical
agreement); e.g. when nouns have each a particular gender suffix while the
neighboring adjective takes whichever gender suffix the noun has. (Again we
might say that the noun is the 'head'.)
To these considerations, the data about individual co-occurrence add a
new factor. We note that in TAN V (The slight hopes faded) each Ni has a
specific set of V-co-occurrents which is hardly affected by the preceding A,
while A does not (the V-co-occurrents of each Ai depend on the following
N). Thus N is that class in the A N construction which has fixed co-occurrence
sets outside. Considerations of this type are available also in cases where the
previously mentioned differentia of status are absent: in the construction
N v V (noun plus tense or 'auxiliary' plus verb: It faded, It grows, We may
swim) both V and v are always present, but each Vi has fixed N-co-occurrents
(hopes may grow, but probably not hopes may swim), while each Vi occurs
with any N that is in the co-occurrence set of its V, and with no other.
All these considerations together (the position, co-occurrence ranges, and
other properties of classes or subconstruction with a construction) determine
what we may call the constructional status or relation of each participating
class or construction in a (larger) construction. We find various types of
status in respect to individual co-occurrence: in Vv neither class has restricted

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMATION

147

co-occurrences (each Vi occurs with all V, and each Vi with all v), but in V P
(chalk up, tie up, tide over) both have. In A N each class has fixed co-occurrences in the other, but only N has fixed co-occurrences in the neighboring
V. The types of constructional status are useful in characterizing each
construction, and in analyzing variolls less obvious constructions (§ 2).5
Many of them serve to explicate intuitively-known grammatical relations:
in the A N type one says that A modifies N. Finally, the types of constructional status themselves are partly determined by investigable conditions, such as the size of the participating classes.
Aside from the matter of constructional status there are certain subclasses
of the major classes which are characterized only by peculiarities of their
individual co-occurrence (§ 2.6).
1.3. Transformations Defined

In addition to investigating the types of co-occurrence for various classes in
a construction, as in § 1.2, we can compare the co-occurrences in two different
constructions which contain the same classes. In many such constructions,
as in N's Nand N is a N above, the co-occurrences are different. In some
constructions the co-occurrences are about the same, and it is for these that
transformations will be defined.
If two or more constructions (or sequences of constructions) which
contain the same n classes (whatever else they may contain) occur with the
same n-tuples of members of these classes in the same sentence environment
(see below), we say that the constructions are transforms of each other, and
that each may be derived from any other of them by a particular transformation. For example, the constructions N v V N (a sentence) and N's
Ving N (a noun phrase) are satisfied by the same triples of N, V, and N (he,
meet, we; foreman, put up, list; etc.); so that any choice of members which we
find in the sentence we also find in the noun phrase and vice versa: He met us,
his meeting us ... ; The foreman put the list up, the foreman's putting the list
up ... Where the class members are identical in the two or more constructions
we have a reversible transformation, and may write e.g. Nt v V Nz+-+Nt's
Ving N z (and the set of triples for the first = the set for the second).6
In some cases all the n-tuples (the choices of one member each out of the n
classes) which satisfy one construction (i.e. for which that construction
actually occurs) also satisfy the other construction, but not vice versa. For
example, every triple of Nt> V, and N z in the Nt v V N z 'active' sentence
(with some exceptions discussed below) can also be found, in reverse order,
in the N z v be Yen by Nt 'passive' sentence: The kids broke the window, The
window was broken by the kids; The detective will watch the staff, The staff
will be watched by the detective. However, some triples satisfy only the

148

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

second sequence and not the first: The wreck was seen by the seashore. Such
cases may be called one-directional or nonreversible transformations:
Nt v V N2~N2 v be Yen by Nt (and the set of triples for the second includes the reversed set for the first). In some cases a transformation appears
nonreversible because of some particular circumstance (such as the homonymity in the two by-constructions here), or because one construction is
much less frequent (so that some word choices are not found in it), or the
like. It may then be possible to formulate it as a reversible transformation
with restricted conditions.
There are also cases in which many or most but not all of the n-tuples that
satisfy one construction also satisfy another; such constructions are then not
transforms of each other, but may have some kindred relation (§ 4.5).
Finally, at the other extreme, if two constructions of the same classes have
no n-tuples in common, so that any word choice which satisfies one fails to
satisfy the other, we have yet another relation of linguistic interest.
Since transformations are based not on the absolute contents of a set of cooccurring n-tuples, but on the similarity between the sets for different constructions, we do not even require a yes-or-no decision on whether any given
n-tuple is in the set. We can accept graded decisions, and we do not even have
to assert that any particular n-tuple never occurs. For example, the formulation might be that to the extent that any n-tuple satisfies N 1 V V N 2 it
also satisfies Nt's Ving N 2 : he, meet, we certainly in both forms; moon, eat,
cheese doubtfully or for particular environments in both forms; soup, drink,
abstraction hardly at all in either form.
There may be differences in some respects between the sets satisfying two
constructions, without precluding a transformational relation. For example,
all or certain ones of the n-tuples may be less frequent or natural in one
construction than in another. Differences of this kind need not restrict the
transformation, if they can be indicated in an adequate manner.
As to the differences between the same-class constructions - for there must
of course be differences between them - these may consist of difference in
order, or in individual morphemes (affixes or words), or in added small or
large classes. If it is impossible to specify which members of the added
classes occur in each instance of the constructions, the statement of the
transformation remains incomplete (§ 4.5).
One condition (mentioned above) which requires some discussion concerns
the sentence environment in which the constructions are being compared. If
the rest of the sentence, outside the constructions under consideration, is not
taken into account, then for example N Ved and N will V would be transforms of each other; for the same pairs of N, V occur before -ed as with will
(The cliff crumbled, The cliff will crumble). If, however, it is required that the

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMATION

149

rest of the sentence be identical, these are not transforms, for -ed and will
differ in some of their more distant co-occurrents: The cliff crumbled yesterday but The cliff will crumble tomorrow. There are various reasons for
excluding such pairs as -ed and will. One is that this yields transformations
that can be usefully distinguished from the direct constructional operations,
such as the combination of classes Vv, or the combining of T and -s 'plural'
with N (§ 5.6). Another reason is that the meaning difference in pairs like
-ed/will seems much greater than that which is characteristic for transformations (see below). 7
The general requirement can be stated as follows: no domain (section of
the sentence or the like) to which the two constructions are grammatically
connected may admit co-occurring morphemes for one of the constructions
which are not admitted for the other. Thus the adverbial position at the end
of the examples above is connectable both to N Ved and to N will V (both
N Ved D and N will V D are grammatical sentence formulas); therefore it
would have to admit the same members in both cases, if these two are to be
transforms. The effect of this requirement is to make the identity of cooccurrence stretch over the maximal grammatical domain, i.e. to preclude
any inequality (restrictions) of co-occurrence that would narrow down what
the grammar permits. In this sense the requirement safeguards the characteristic of transformations, which is to have no co-occurrence restrictions
that are correlated with the difference between the two constructions (i.e.
with zero as against be ... -en ... by plus reverse order in the active/passive,
or with -ed as against will in the present rejected case). Note that this
formulation does not contravene the transformational standing of N v V N
and N's Ving N, even though the sentence environment of the latter is
lacking in the former. The latter, being a noun phrase, is always connected
to the remaining constructions of its sentence (We're uncertain about his
meeting us; The foreman's putting the list up caused the wildcat). But these
additional sentence-parts cannot be connected to N v V N since that is a
sentence in itself, hence their absence here is due to grammatical conditions
and not to any inequality of co-occurrence.
The consideration of meaning mentioned above is relevant because some
major element of meaning seems to be held constant under transformation.
There may be differences in meaning between two constructions that are
transforms of each other, due to their external grammatical status: e.g. the
fact that N v V N is a sentence while N's Ving N is a noun phrase. There may
be differences of emphasis or style, as between the active and the passive.
And certain transforms have specific meaning differences associated with the
specific morphemes they add, as between assertion and question. But aside
from such differences, transforms seem to hold invariant what might be

150

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

interpreted as the information content. This semantic relation is not merely
because the same morphemes are involved. For example, The man bit the dog
(N2 v V N 1) contains the same morphemes as The dog bit the man (N1 v V N 2),
but it describes quite a different situation; and N 2 V V N 1 is not a transform
of N 1 v V N 2, for many triples satisfy one but not the other (The citizens destroyed the barracks and The bystander reported the accident will hardly occur
in reverse order). In contrast The man was bitten by the dog (N2 v be V en by
N 1) describes more or less the same situation as The dog bit the man, and is a
transform of N1 v V N 2 , as seen above.
The determination and explication of this meaning relation is no simple
matter, and will be only touched upon in § 5.7. But it points to one of the
major utilities of transformational analysis.
1.4. Determining the Evidence

To establish the transformations in any given language we need methods, and
if possible an organized procedure, for seeking (§ 1.41) what constructions
may contain identical co-occurrences; these methods should if possible be
general, but additional ones may be based on special features of the language.
And we need methods of checking (§§ 1.42-3) the co-occurrences in each
construction, so as to see if they are indeed identical.
1.41. Domains of Transformation

To find domains that may be transforms, we need to consider only
constructions, since it appears that a given class has specifiable relations'
(restrictions) of individual co-occurrence only in respect to constructions,
e.g. the relations appear between the head A class and nonhead class of a
construction (N and A respectively in A N), or between the head of construction c and the head of construction k when c +k in turn constitute a
larger construction (N head of the noun phrase and V head of the verb
phrase in the sentence TAN +V v D, The new girl laughed loudly). There
are no co-occurrence relations between the A and the D here, these being
two nonheads in the two constructions; but there is such a relation within
the adjective phrase D A, where the A is the head (partly new)~ These domains may, however, be sequences of constructions, as when we wish to
compare the sentence sequence T N1 V 2 • T N1 D V3 TN with T N1 who
V 2 D V 3 T N4 (The king abdicated,
The king soon resumed the throne vs.

*

The king who abdicated soon resumed the throne).

The constructions must of course contain the same classes, the co-occurrences of whose members are to be checked; in the case of construction
sequences some of the class members (indicated by class symbol with
subscript) may occur twice, as the repeated N 1 in the last example above.

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMATION

151

The search for same-class constructions may become complicated, especially
in languages where different class sequences can substitute for each other in
the same constructions; for example, the position of A in the A N construction can be occupied also by N na (making it N na N childish laugh),
so that if we seek constructions containing two N we have not only N is
N, N P N (Pines of Rome), and the like, but also the Nna N case of the
A N construction.
The conditions of search may be different according as the morphemes
which are added in one or both constructions (added to the classes that are
same in both) are affixes or words, and according as they are uniquely
specified morphemes, members of a small class, or members of a large class.
For if the two constructions are expected to be transforms, the added
material should not restrict which class members are going to occur; for
example, in comparing Ally A2 (exceptionally large, undesirably noisy) with
Al A 2 ness (exceptional largeness, undesirable noisiness) we might as well ask
at the start if -ness occurs with all A (or with all of a specifiable subclass of
A); for if it does not, then various values of A2 will be lacking before -ness
while present in the other construction; i.e., the other construction will be
satisfied by some values which will not satisfy the -ness construction.
Affixes are more likely, in many languages, to occur with only a restricted
number of particular members of their neighboring class, so that constructions containing them often have other co-occurrences than same-class
constructions which do not contain them. Among the affixes that do not
restrict the members of their neighboring class are what are called paradigmatic affixes, such as tenses; however, such affixes often restrict word
choices elsewhere in the sentence, as in the case of -ed and will above.
Given these considerations, there are various ways of collecting sets of
tentative transforms. One can simply select sequences of morphemes and
seek the same combinations in other constructions. One can go through the
types of class construction in the language - affixings, compound words,
word constructions, sentence sequences; eliminate those in which the added
material introduces unique restrictions on the main classes; note which
constructions contain the same classes (with changes of order or additions),
or have subtypes with the same classes (like the N na N subtype of A N);
and chart each set of same-class constructions in some manner convenient
for checking which of them have the same co-occurrences satisfying the
same classes. One can make a preliminary test by choosing a wide semantic
and morphological scatter of n-tuples satisfying one n-class construction and
seeing if this arbitrary group also satisfies the other constructions of the same
classes. Finally, one can go through some texts in the language, and for each
construction or sequence of them ask what other combination of the same

152

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMA TIONAL LINGUISTICS

major morphemes would be substitutable (acceptable to author or reader)
in the same place in the text. 8
1.42. Obtaining Co-Occurrence Ranges

To check whether the co-occurrences are identical in two n-class constructions (suspected of being transforms), we obtain a list of n-tuples which
satisfy the first construction and ask about each one whether it also satisfies
the second; and vice versa. Or we hold constant n -I members of an n-tuple,
and ask for a list of members of the nth class satisfying the first construction
and a list of members of that class satisfying the second. For example, to
test NI v V N2 and N2 v be Yen by N I , we begin, say, with The cat drank ( )
and ask for a list of words that would fil out thel sentence, and then we offer
( ) was drunk by the cat and ask for a list of words that would fill out that
sentence.
Such checking of individual co-occurrences is not practicable without an
informant, i.e. a more or less native speaker of the language. It is impossible
to survey everything that has been said or written in a language, even within a
specified period. And if we wanted a sample that would serve for the language
as a whole, we would need an impracticably large body of texts or other
material. Work with an informant can be carried out under partly controlled conditions by various methods of eliciting, i.e. by presenting him
with linguistic environments which favor the appearance of utterances
relevant to our investigation, without influencing him in any way that might
bring out utterances which would not sometimes occur naturally. Instead of
wading through masses of speech and writing in search of the co-occurrents
of The cat drank, we present this environment to a speaker and obtain a
whole list. One has to guard, of course, against various factors which might
bring out co-occurrents that would not occur outside the eliciting situation.
It is possible in various ways to control the validity of the elicited results
for the language as a whole. Different informants may be asked for parallel
lists, or one may be asked to fill one construction while a second fills the
other. The validity of the lists as a sample of the co-occurrence range for the
whole language may be checked by letting the sample grow: we may obtain
a list of 50 items for The child saw ( ) and 50 for ( ) was seen by the chi/d,
and then an additional 50 each, and see if the two lists become more nearly
identical as they grow, or - more relevantly - if the similarity increases faster
with the growth of these lists than is the case when we build up two lists for
The child saw ( ) and ( ) saw the child.
1.43. Testing for Identity of Co-Occurrence Ranges

In these applications, eliciting is like ordinary observation, i.e. hunting

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMA nON

153

about for occurrences of our constructions, except that here the relevant
data are concentrated. Questions of validation, statistical or other, are
essentially the same as for ordinary observational data. However, eliciting
can also be used to test whether a particular co-occurrent is acceptable,
something which enables us to check whether the two sets of n-tuples
satisfying two constructions are identical or only increasingly similar;
observation and ordinary eliciting can only indicate similarity. In this testeliciting we take the co-occurrents observed for one construction but not
obtained for the other, and ask the informant whether he would say them or
has heard them. This is a very different type of experimental condition. It involves new and great sources of error, due to the suggestiveness of the
material presented to the informant, or due to his own response to the
unusual linguistic situation. There are also uncertainties in the result: the
informant may say that he is not sure, or his response may reveal unsureness.
And the results involve a new measure: degree or type of acceptability
(natural, uncomfortable, nonce-form); for example, if we are testing cooccurrents of ( )ish, an informant may be uncertain about grandfatherish,
consider deepish uncomfortable, and countryside-ish a nonce-form, and reject
uncle-ish or wise-ish outright.
Since we cannot test all the co-occurrents of each construction in the other,
we try to test a wide variety, checking to see if any relevant subclass satisfies
one but not the other. Thus we may test co-occurrents of widely different
meanings, or of different morphological structures: in comparing A Nand
N is A, we may test not only A but also A aa like largeish, N na like childish,
and V va like speaking. We may test any co-occurrents which seem to be
peculiar, or metaphoric, or productive, to see if they also occur in the other
construction. We may thus find the specific co-occurrents which are actually
rejected (not merely have not been found) for one ofthe constructions; these
co-occurrents become diagnostic for saying explicitly that the two constructions are not transforms.
1.44. Summary
We may say, then, that to determine transformations we need to find
same-class constructions which seem relevant, collect and compare the cooccurrences in each, and test to see if differences between them are upheld.
If one construction is less frequent (e.g. the passive as against the active), it is
usually more convenient to begin with this, and test to see if all its cooccurrents also satisfy the more frequent construction. It is of interest to note
whether the relative frequency and the relative acceptability (from natural to
nonce) of the co-occurrents are similar in both constructions, and to see if
we can list or characterize those co-occurrents which have not been found

154

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

(or have been diagnostically rejected) in one construction as against the
other.
The results can often be summarized in a chart of same co-occurrence,
which organizes all the different constructions that exist for a given set of
classes keeping constant the same co-occurrences, where the set is satisfied in
all the constructions by the same set of members.
2. CO-OCCURRENCE AS A STRUCTURAL PROPERTY
2.0. Just how much grammatical knowledge is needed before transformations can be investigated depends in part on how much work is put into
discovering the transformations. It may be enough merely to identify the
morphemes and to have a constructional analysis of the simpler sentence
types (as in § 5.4). For the present formulation, however, we will assume the
whole of the usual structural grammar of the language, in order nottohave to
distinguish parts which are not needed.
2.1. Dependent Elements in Constructions

While some parts of grammar may not be needed, it is helpful if the parts
which are used (e.g. the morpheme classes and the major constructions) have
a very detailed analysis; for then the transformations are more apparent.
This means a detailed investigation of how the occurrence of one morpheme
or sequence (or stress or tone) in a sentence depends on the occurrence of
some other in the same sentence or nearby, so that a change in one is
accompanied by a change in the other. For example, if we offer an informant
the utterance The letter was returned :3« It must have been misaddressed and
ask him to substitute The letters for The letter, it is almost certain that he will
also substitute They for It. If we get as many tense substitutions as we can in
the sentence The dog bit me as ifhe had been a man we will probably find some
tense combinations lacking, indicating some dependence between the two
tense morphemes in this position. Some elements are completely dependent,
as the my (or the I) in I saw myself.
In general, we can express certain dependent occurrences within a construction by a single discontinuous morpheme: Given this book but these
books, and The refugee became my friend but The refugees became my friends,
we can say that there is a discontinuous -s 'plural' which occurs after both A
and N of the A N construction, and after both N of the N is N construction
(and after just N when it occurs alone). This is preferable to saying that
there are two occurrences of -s, but that each appears only if the other does.
Similarly, given I see but He sees, and You know but The child knows, we can
say that every N except I and you has another discontinuous -s (variant of

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMA TION

155

'present') which appears after the N V construction if there is no -s 'plural'
after the N.
In contrast, when we find dependent occurrence between two neighboring
constructions, it may be more useful to say that a given element has occurred
twice (i.e. that the two constructions have an element in common), than to
say that a single element extends discontinuously over both constructions.
One such case appears when a morpheme in one construction varies with a
corresponding morpheme in the other: I saw the doctor whom you by-passed
but I saw the book which you by-passed; similarly The letter ... It ... and The
letters ... They ... above. 9 Here we can describe the dependence by saying
that -om, -ich, it are positional alternants of doctor, book, letter respectively,
in the positions illustrated. That is, in I saw the N; wh( ) you by-passed, the
( )om and ( )ich are variant forms of certain N i , and in the experimentally
varied sequence The N; was returned ( ) must have been misaddressed, the it
is a variant form of the N j •
Another type of dependence between two constructions appears when construction c (in the neighborhood of construction k) never contains a particular
morpheme or class which is present in k. Tn such cases, if c is a unique
construction in the grammar, whereas c plus the absent morpheme or class
would be an otherwise known construction, we may say that the morpheme
or class in question indeed occurs in c but in the form of a zero; that is,
when the 'morpheme or class in question occurs in both c and k, its variant
form in c is zero. We thus avoid having a unique construction in c. For
example, in The shelf is wider than the closet we may obtain an additional A
(with intonational change), as in The shelfis wider than the closet is deep, but
the A will not be the same as the preceding one (wide). We can then say that,
if there is no second A, a zero variant of the morpheme wide occurs at the
end of the original sentence; so that although wide is the one A that seems
not to occur there, we so to speak explain this by saying that wide is already
present but in a zero form. Since more than and ( )er than occur in general
between two whole sentence structures (He knows more than I know, The
shelf is wide+( )er than+the closet is deep), having just an N after ( )er
than would be a unique construction for that position: The shelf is wide +
( )er than + the closet. This unique construction is avoided by saying that the
morphemes is wide of the first sentence structure are present also in the
second construction, so that the second is also a sentence structure. Note
that this satisfies the meaning of the sentence, which indeed refers to the
width of the closet.
This explanation is useful even when there is no dependence to be analyzed
as a double occurrence. For example, in constructions like I know whom you
by-passed or Whom did you by-pass? the V by-pass is never followed by an

156

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

object N, though elsewhere it is. We can then say that whom-or, for other
reasons, just the ( )om-is itself the object N2 of by-pass, so that ( )om
you by-passed becomes the well-known construction N 1 V V N 2 with the N 2
moved up. We avoid having unique constructions like you by-passed without
object N.
These few examples will illustrate without further discussion the kind of
detailed analysis which is entirely in terms of classes and constructions.l° It
will be found useful for what follows, in several respects. First, it helps
specify the domain of a construction, or of what one might call a grammatical
relation: The one who knows doesn '( tell and The ones who know don 'f tell
show that both V (know, do) carry the discontinuous -s of The one. Second,
it shows the type of many obscure constructions, by eliminating some morphemes (as being discontinuous parts of others), discovering the presence of
some (as alternant forms of others), and assigning some to known classes (by
comparing their constructional status, e.g. for the -om object). For example,
the sentence last cited seems to be a new complex construction N 1 who V2
V3, with both V connected to the same N; but analyzing -0 as an alternant
of the preceding N reveals two N V constructions, N 1 V2 and -0 ( = N 1) V3,
without denying the fact that both V are related to The one. Third, the
present kind of analysis separates out various relevant subclasses. For
example, the plural morpheme extends over both N in N was N, N seemed
N, etc. but not in N saw N (The refugees saw my friend, The refugees saw
my friends). This puts is, seem, become, etc. into a special V subclass.
2.2. Considerations from Co-Occurrence

We now proceed to take into consideration, as a correction upon the classconstruction grammar, any data of interest concerning the individual cooccurrences of members of each class.
Individual co-occurrence can be used even to identify a morpheme (or
word) in cases where the phonemic composition does not suffice (i.e. in
homonymity). For example,flight can be identified asfly plus a vn suffix and
also asflee plus a vn suffix. Which of these it is in a given appearance depends
on whether its co-occurrences in the sentence (or even beyond) conform to
those offly or to those offlee: in rocket flight we have the same co-occurrence
as in the rocket flies; in flight from danger we have it as in flee from danger;
and inflight of the Polish crew to Denmark we can match bothflew andfled
in the Polish crew ( ) to Denmark. Here indeed both identifications - and
both meanings - are simultaneously operative. Somewhat analogously, we
can consider the morphemic division of, say, joker and hammer: these are
both N,joke and ham both exist as V, and V +er=N, so that one might ask
if hammer is ham+-er. However, the co-occurrences of joker generally

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMA TION

157

conform to those of joke (He is a joker and He jokes both occur before even
on serious subjects, or in the old slapstick style, etc.), which is not in general
the case for hammer and ham: It is a hammer but He hams; ( ) for heavy
construction as against ( ) instead 0/ answering seriously.u
The use of individual co-occurrence in investigating constructional status
has been mentioned in § 1.2. This can be used to check or carry further the
constructional results of § 2.1. For example, it follows from the methods of
§ 2.1 that -om or -ich are alternant forms of their preceding N; and are at the
same time objects of the Vj following (i.e. have the same grammatical
relation to the Vj as does Nk in the N Vj Nk construction). This is supported
by the fact that the N; preceding -om N Vj or -ich N Vj is indeed one of the
Nk co-occurrents of Vj: we can find both doctor and book in He by-passed
the ( ).
Some constructions which have the same classes are nevertheless distinguishable by co-occurrence. For example, in such constructions as The strain
made him speak the second V will always be one of the co-occurrents of the
second N (in an N V sentence) but not necessarily of the first: speaks occurs
after He but hardly after The strain. We can therefore say that N2 is the
subject of V 2' and that N 1 VI N 2 V 2 contains an N 2 V 2 sentence-construction.
The methods touched upon in §§ 2.1-2 will now be applied to obtain
certain grammatical analyses in English which will be particularly useful in
the subsequent statement of English transformations.

2.3. P Nand D
Only the most relevant distinctions about these two constructions will be
mentioned here. There are many subclasses of P and of D which differ in
position relative to other classes, and in type of co-occurrence with the
members of these other classes. Among P, for example, to occurs before all V
morphemes as well as before N; of, at,/rom, into,/or have constructional
relation only to their following N; in, up, over, etc. have constructional
relation either to following N (walk up the hill) or to preceding V (slice the
meat up). Among D, very occurs only before A or D, quite also before P N,
downward etc. after V, Aly before A/y, A, or V, and after V, and often at the
beginning of a sentence. Occasionally sequences P P occupy the position of
one P (over to the side).
Of the members of P which occur after V, particular V P pairs co-occur
(think it over but not think it across). The construction P N, in contrast, has
very few restrictions on co-occurrence within it; but here the interest
attaches rather to the co-occurrences of P N as a unit with other parts of the
sentence. P N occurs directly after N with minor restrictions of co-occurrence:
many but not all N P N triples occur (time of day, store near the corner).

158

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

Analogously after V: many but hardly all triples satisfy V P N (leave at
night, pass in a rush). Certain P N occur in any of several sentence positions,
initially or finally or between the N and the V, often separated by comma
intonation; these seem to have no co-occurrence restriction to the N or to the
V (At this point he thought it over). The P N after N are similar in constructional status to A before N, and there is a partial similarity in the co-occurrence
restrictions (where we can get the same classes in both, e.g. Nl na N2 and
N2 P Nl wooden table and table of wood; but not for wooden smile, kind of
wood). The other P N, after V and in several sentence positions, are similar
to D in constructional status and again partially in co-occurrence restrictions.
Some sequences require more detailed constructional analysis: V P N
may be V P+N (slice up the meat, also slice the meat up) or V +P N (crawl
up the bank, but not crawl the bank up); similarly for V P P N, etc. And in
V N 1 P N 2 the N 1 P N 2 may be a unit as above, i.e. it may be one of the
triples which satisfies N 1 P N z in any position; the usual case then is a V N 1
pair plus an Nl P N z triple (receive reports of unrest). Or Nl P N z may be a
triple which hardly occurs except after this V (or certain V); then it may be a
V Nl pair plus a V P N2 triple (take the child to the laboratory).12
Within N P N there are several different types which are relevant to transformations. Certain N pairs which occur in Nl P N z also occur in Nt> N z (i.e.
with only comma intonation between them) or in Nl is N z ; in these cases the
sentence environment which occurs around N 1 P N 2 can often also be found
around N 1 or N z alone: I like the job of sorting; I like the job; I like sorting;
The job is sorting; This job, sorting, ... Similarly They moved toward the goal
of greater production; The goal is greater production, etc. We might call these
parallel N P N.l3
By contrast, the great majority of N 1 P N z triples do not satisfy the other
formulas above; and the sentence environments of these Nl P N z will be
found around Nl alone but not in general around N 2; cf. This raised hopes
for a settlement and This raised hopes. N 1 has the same external co-occurrents
as Nl P N z, but N z does not. In other respects too the Nl is the head of the
construction, e.g. only the N 1 participates in discontinuous morphemes that
reach outside the construction: A list of names is appended; Lists of names
are appended; Hopes of peace are rising. The P N2 here has a constructional
status (and co-occurrence pairing with N l ) somewhat similar to that of A;
we may call it the P N =A type.
In some Nl P N z triples the head is N 2 • That is, it is N z and not N1 that
occurs in the same sentence environments as the whole N 1 P N z; and in
many of these it is the N z rather than the N1 that gets the discontinuous
morpheme which extends to the next construction: A number of boys were
arguing; Lots of color brightens it; A part of the Moguls were illiterate. Here

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMATION

159

it is the N 1 P that is similar in status and co-occurrence to A, and the type
may be called N P = A.
There are certain Nt ofN2 (to be called reversible) which also occur in
reverse order N2 P Nt (with P being of or some different P) in the same
sentence environments. The Nt here is usually one of a roughly stateable
subclass including set, type, group, class: This type of bacteria grows readily;
Bacteria of this type grow readily (it is not claimed that the meanings are
identical); A clump of some villagers was milling about; Some villagers in a
clump were milling about. Reverse order in same environment (usually with
change of P) also is found for some of the preceding types: A great number of
boys were arguing; Boys in great number were arguing. 14
For the P N = A type of NIP N 2, and to a lesser extent for the other types,
we can often find the same triples appearing in the construction NI is P N 2:
The hopes are for a settlement; This type is of bacteria, The bacteria are of
this type. However, certain triples cannot be obtained in the latter construction: point of departure, time of day. These are often the cases which
seem more 'idiomatic'; they may be called compound N P N, akin to compound words. A related close-knit sequence is the PI N2 P 3 N4 in which the
P 1 N2 P 3 occurs throughout in the same individual sentence environments
as a single P: He phoned in regard to ajob; They won by dint of a fluke. The
N 2 P 3 N4 members of this construction do not occur in N 2 is P 3 N4, and
some do not even occur together except after Pl ' The analysis here is not
P1 +N2 P 3 N 4 , but PI N2 P 3 (=compound P, compare the P P compounds
mentioned above)+N4 •
2.4. C
Members of the class C (and, but, more than, etc.) have in general the property that they occur between two instances of the same construction. Given
an utterance containing C, it is in general possible to find a construction X
immediately before C and a construction Y immediately after C, such that X
and Y have the same status within the next larger construction; examples are
a pale but cheerful face: two A within an N phrase; the low wages and long
hours in Detroit: two A N sequences within an N phrase; The low wages
and the long hours were the chief causes: two N phrases within a sentence;
Either I go or you go: two sentence structures within a sentence. This means
that both X alone and Y alone can occur in the same structural environment
as X C Y: a pale face, a cheerful face. 15 In some cases it seems as though we
do not have identical constructions on both sides of C: I'll take the first and
you the second; We got there on time but not he; He came, and fast; He's
bigger than you. In § 3.1, however, it will be seen that the shorter construction in each case contains zero forms of morphemes which are visible

160

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

only in the longer construction, and precisely enough zeros to make it the
same construction.
It has been pointed out 16 that the positions in which: C occurs can be used
to test the immediate constituents of a structure, that is the successive
breakdown of a structure into the next largest constructions which are
included within it. The two conjoined subconstructions have the same
constituent status in the larger construction. For example, we have He
shingled and painted the roof. The immediate constituents of shingled the
roof are shingled and the roof; for painted the roof they are painted and the
roof; and the two constituents shingled and painted are joined by C within
their common next-larger construction ( ) the roof. But we do not have He
climbed to and painted the roof. The immediate constituents of climbed to
the roof are climbed and to the roof.
In addition to the equivalence in external status for both constructions,
the two constructions around C are in general accepted more comfortably in
English when their internal structure is similar: bigger and better rather than
big and better. But this does not apply when junctures separate off C plus the
second construction: big, and better, ...
Not only the class environments, but also the individual co-occurrences of
X and of Y alone are often the same as for X C Y. This holds for certain
members of C: and, many occurrences of or, etc. Even for and there are
certain pairs of X Y which do not occur singly in the same individual environments in which they occur together: She and I don't see eye to eye;
Sugar and water make syrup; It rocked to and fro. These pairs, or certain
properties of them as a subclass, can be investigated, in order to distinguish
them from all the others. There are great differences, both in this and other
respects, among the various C.
2.5 v (Auxiliaries)

If we compare He paints, He painted with He doesn't paint, He does paint,
Did he paint?, Only then did he paint, I painted and so did he, we see that in the
presence of certain conditions (not, emphatic stress, question intonation,
etc.) V + its suffix is replaced by do+that suffix + V; and that in a subset of
these conditions (question, or after certain words) do+the suffix further
changes places with the preceding N. If we consider that the main V here
remains paint, it will not be easy to explain the occurrence of do here. If we
consider that the main V in the altered sentences is do, with paint as some
secondary element (as it is e.g. in He learned to paint) th~ grammar will be
simpler. But it will turn out that the individual sentence environments in these
altered sentences will be identical with those where paint is the V, even
though in the altered sentences the V is now do. This is not the case in other

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMA TION

161

sentences where paint is a secondary element: the mdividual sentence
environments around doesn't paint are closely related to those around paint;
but for, say, learned to paint we can find environments where paint might not
occur, such as He learned to paint from the impressionists.
If now we compare He will paint with He will not paint, He will paint, Will
he paint?, Only then will he paint, I'll paint and so will he, we see that under
the same conditions the V + auxiliaries (will, can, etc.) do not change, except
that in the subset of conditions mentioned above the auxiliary changes place
with the preceding N. This and other considerations which will appear in
§§ 2.5, 6 suggest that the -s, -ed be considered affixes of paint even after they
move in front of it, and that the do which precedes them be considered not a
morpheme at all but only a phonemic carrier for the suffixes when they do
not have their V before them. (The suffixes occur only after a phonemic
word, and interchange in position with V leaves them without a phonemic
word.)
On this basis we can now analyze the forms which have neither suffix nor
auxiliary: They paint, They do not paint, They do paint, Do they paint?, Only
then do they paint, We paint and so do they. We say that there is a zero suffix
(variant of the -s) after the V paint, which moves in front of the V under the
conditions indicated. Like the other suffixes, this zero is always attached to a
preceding phonemic word, and here receives the carrier do,17
There are now two different interchanges of position ('inversions'). One is
that the suffixes -ed and zero (with variant -s) of V appear in front of V
under all the conditions of the type illustrated above; they then have the
carrier do. The other is that both of these suffixes and also the auxiliaries
will, can, etc. appear in front of the preceding (subject) N in the subset of
conditions exemplified above. The first inversion simply brings the suffixes
over to the auxiliary position, when certain elements (including the emphatic)
come before the V,18
The class v has the following properties: (1) each occurs with each V; (2) V
never occurs without some v or other, nor v without some V (apparent
exceptions will be discussed in § 2.63, § 2.7); (3) each v may have some
restrictions as to the separable D, P N in its sentence (e.g. -ed will hardly
occur directly with tomorrow); (4) but aside from such restrictions, which
apply to a given v equally for all V, the individual sentence environments of
each V remain the same no matter what the v. Note that this is not the case
for, say, learned to paint, learned to talk, where the sentence environments
differ in various ways from those of painted, talked.
The first and third of these three properties also apply to the constructions
in He is painting, He has painted, He has been painting. All constructions of
this type can be described by saying that between the v and the V there

162

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

occur, sometimes but not always, have ( )en, be ( )ing, or the first of these
followed by the second; the empty parentheses mark the location of the
following V word (including have and be). Then He paints, He can paint have
v V; is painting, may be painting are v + be ( )ing + V; has painted, hadpainted,
will have painted are v + have ( )en + V; has been painting, could have been
painting are v+have -en+be -ing+ V. These constructions may be viewed as
expansions of v, constituting v-phrases of which the v proper is the head. 19
2.6. Pro-Morphemes

In class-structural terms the traditionally recognized category of pronoun
cannot be defined. I, he, this, etc. are members of N by their class environments (e.g. all occur before V to make a sentence), but no adequate further
distinction can be found for them. However, in terms of individual cooccurrence they are a distinct group. If we ask for the V-co-occurrents following which in The bird which ( ) or I spotted the bird which ( ), we will find,
in both cases, a list including sang,flew,fluttered, was shot, etc. If we ask for
the V-co-occurrents following The bird ( ) we will obtain a similar list (and
can elicit an identical list). If we ask for the V-co-occurrents of which in The
wall which ( ) or I was watching the wall which ( ), we will get cracked,
collapsed, was repainted, etc., and this is also the list for The wall ( ). In
general, the V-co-occurrents following which (those V whose subject is which
by the methods of § 2.1), in each sentence in which which appears, equal the
V-co-occurrents ofthe N immediately preceding the which in that sentence. 20
Now consider the fact that which may occur after any member of a particular
(nonhuman) subclass ofN. If we ask what is the total list of V-eo-occurrents
that follow which in all of its appearances (i.e. in any sentence whatever), we
will see that it equals the total V-co-occurrents of all the members of its
subclass. In one or another appearance of which we may find any V-cooccurrent of bird, or of wall, or of book, etc. Analogous properties will hold
for other words traditionally called pronouns.
We can now generalize. There exist morphemes whose X-co-occurrents
(for each class X in constructional relation to them), in each sentence, equal
the X-co-occurrents of a morpheme (of class Y) occupying a stated position
(or one of several stated positions), relative to them, in the same sentence (or
sequence of sentences), and whose total X-co-occurrents in all the appearances
of these morphemes equal the sum of the X-co-occurrents of all the members
of the class Y (which occupies the stated position relative to them). Such
morphemes will be called pro-morphemes of the class Y, or pro-Yo If the Y
position with the same X-co-occurrents (roughly what is called the antecedent
position) is uniquely determined, the pro-Y will be called bound. If it is not
completely determined, the pro-Y may be called indeterminately bound; in

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMATION

163

this case we cannot tell definitely to which antecedent the pro-Y 'refers'. The
pro-Yean be viewed in each sentence as a positional (variant) form of its
antecedent in that sentence, as was done for -om and -ich in § 2.1.21
2.61. Pronouns
The morphemes he, I, etc. which appear as pro-morphemes of the class N
usually occur indeterminately bound, so that one cannot specify without
investigation which preceding or following N has the same range of cooccurrents: Mark came too late; Carl had taken his painting and gone off. In
many cases this pronoun is not bound at all, that is, it does not have the cooccurrence range of (and does not refer to) any N in its neighborhood, as in a
story in which a character is never referred to except as he. Such pro-morphemes may be called free; they lack the pro-morpheme property of having
antecedents, but possess the other property of having a co-occurrence range
equal to the sum of co-occurrence ranges of a stateable class (N). This is
equivalent to saying that in each appearance of a pronoun, including a free
pronoun, one can always find some noun of its subclass that could substitute for it, i.e. could be found in its position in that sentence. 22
One can study, for each structure that contains pro-morphemes, the degree
and type of uncertainty in their boundedness (in the location of their antecedents), by such structural methods as their participation in discontinuous
morphemes (the man will not be an antecedent for they), by the restriction of
some pro-morphemes to particular subclasses (the man is not an antecedent
for she), and by testing the co-occurrence ranges of the pro-morpheme and
its putative antecedents.
Some pro-morphemes have stateable antecedents only in very few structures. For example, I and you have N, he, or she as their antecedents, but
only when in particular quote positions: N said 'I .. .', ... said to N 'You .. .';
and they are replaced by he or she when the quote intonation is replaced by
that: N said that he... In addition, I and you replace each other in the
question-answer sequence.
In some cases, a small set of pronouns covers (between them) the whole N
class, each member of the set having only some subclass of N as its antecedent: he and she and it. Other pronouns range over the whole N or some
subclass of it: this, that, some, another, everyone, etc. 23
All these are (with some individual differences) pro-morphemes ofthe full
N-phrase (including N-pbrase P N-phrase=N-phrase: The book of old
songs ... It ... ). This is a way of stating the fact that we do not find, for
example, the or old before it, or of songs after it. These are therefore pro-Nphrases, and are members of the class N-phrase rather than of the class N.
Hence he, this, etc. include T within them (i.e. they constitute a recurrence,

164

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

or a variant form, of some neighboring N-phrase with its the, a, some, etc.),
and this gives them an individuating semantic effect. That is, in The man ...
he ... , the pro-morpheme he indicates a recurrence not merely of the morpheme man but of the particular man individuated by its article the.
In addition, one occurs as a pro-N (except for mass nouns), not a pro-Nphrase: He bought a large painting, but I'd prefer a small one; As to exams,
the hardest ones are still to come. There are also zero pro-N, whose antecedent is always in another sentence structure: Her hair is lighter than her
brother's (where hair may be repeated in full, or by zero pro-N); The people
tried but soon gave up (where the people recurs after but in the pro-N-phrase
they or zero).24
2.62. The wh-Pro-Morphemes
If we consider who 25, which, what, where, when, why, etc., we find that they
can all be described as occurring in a specific position, namely before a
sentence structure S2 which lacks some particular constituent. The methods
of § 2.1 show that the wh- word has precisely the status of this constituent. 26
Furthermore, since wh- is common to all these we extract it as a morpheme
which indicates this construction as a whole, while the residues of each wh
word are morphemes each with the specific constructional status of the
section that is lacking in S2' The wh- itself then precedes a complete S2 (made
complete by inclusion of the post-wh- element). In the thus completed S2' -0
is subject N-phrase, -om object N, -ose is N's (which is a member of A), -ich
and -at are N or A (A if an N follows, as in which books, what books), -ere,
-en, -ither, etc. are P N, and -y (of why) can be taken as P N or C S (subordinating conjunction plus sentence).
There are three main positions in which the whole wh- + S2 occurs: with
question intonation, as adjective-phrase after nouns, and as object or subject
of another sentence. The list of post-wh- morphemes is slightly different after
each of these.
wh- S?: Who took the book?, Where did it go?, Where did it come from?,
From where did it come? Here the post-wh- pro-morpheme is free, except
that it will be shown in § 3.3 to parallel (and to be pro-morphemically bound
to) the corresponding N, P N, etc. in the accompanying assertion (It went
to the right). The wh- here may be viewed as a member of the class of sentence
introducers or connectors.
In the other two positions, wh-+S2 is imbedded within another sentence
Sl'
N wh- S2 (excluding what, why) occurring in any N-phrase position within
Sl; the post-wh- morpheme filling any N (or, in the case of -ere etc., any
P N) position within S2; The villagers who escaped reached home; He picked a

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMATION

165

flower which had dropped; I met the fellow whose papers I found; In the place
which I mentioned. P preceding wh- goes with the post-wh- morpheme in S2:
From the place in which I stood (-ich pro-N of the place); it parallels wh-+
P N: From the place where I stood (-ere is P plus pro-N of the place). In each
case the post-wh- pro-morpheme is bound to the immediately preceding N
word as antecedent (or if N P N precedes, then to one of these N). Within
its following S2 the post-wh- morpheme can fill any N or P N position. Like
other bound pro-N-phrases, the post-wh- pro-morpheme refers to the same
individual as its antecedent. The wh- S2 can be viewed as an A-phrase of the
preceding N (like The villagers escaping from the camp reached home); and
when it is separated off by comma intonation it has the co-occurrence
characteristics of a descriptive A (The villagers, who had escaped, ... ; see
§ 3.8). The wh- in this construction can therefore be considered an sa morpheme (i.e. a morpheme which is added to a sentence and yields an adjective),
or as a conjunction C between the two sentence structures (The villagers
reached home and The villagers escaped, I met the man and I had found the
man's papers). 27
wh- S2 as subject or object: Here the post-wh- pro-morpheme is free, with
no antecedent, and fills a place in its S2' In wh- S2 V, the wh- S2 is subject of
V: What happened is history; Where I went is irrelevant. In N + objectrequiring V + wh- S2, the whole wh- S2 may seem (by co-occurrence comparisons) to be the object of the preceding V: I saw who was there. The whhere may be viewed as an sn morpheme, making an S into a subject or object
N-phrase. For other cases, however, it is simpler to say (as perhaps can also
be said for the cases above) that 8 2 is not the object or subject of S1' but an
independent sentence which shares a free pro-morpheme with S1: I found
what you lost being I found N; (-at)+ You lost N j (-at); the wh- is then a
conjunction. 28 In P wh- Nand wh- P N, the N is shared, but the P belongs to
either or both of 8 1 and S2 depending on whether their V require P. P only in
S2: I know with whom he sat,' I know whom he sat with (I know -om+he sat
with -om); I know where he sat (I know + the pro-N part of -ere;+He sat+
the P part of -ere + the pro-N part of -ere). P only in S1: I cooked with what
(ever) we had (I cooked with -at + We had -at); I kept looking for what he had
come with (I kept looking for -at+He had come with -at); but in wh- P N
(-ere etc.) the P is hardly ever excluded from 8 2 , P in both: I cooked with
what he had cooked (I cooked with -at+He had cooked with -at); I stayed
where we had lived previously (I stayed+-ere as P plus pro-N + We had lived
previously+-ere as P plus pro-N).29
2.63. Pro-V
If we compare I'll go if you will with I'll go if you will go, we see that go can

166

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

have a zero variant in its second occurrence; this zero is analogous to, say,
-0 as second-occurrence variant of the man in the man who, and satisfies the
conditions for being called a pro-verb. In all cases like the short form above,
the one V (go) is in the V-co-occurrence for both N (I, you), and is the
antecedent of the bound zero pro-morpheme at the end. The auxiliary v may
be different (I'll go if you can't) or the same, but in any case it occurs in full
in the second part, so that the pro-morpheme covers only the V and not
v+ V (there is no I'll go if you). When we consider I left when he did, we
understand (on the basis of § 2.5) that this is the same construction: after
the second N there is no V (did) but only the -ed tense (member of v) with a
carrier do. The pro-V here is not do but zero, as in the other members ofv.
We find the tenses and other auxiliaries intermingled in I left so that he
would, I can go if they did. We therefore analyze I can not as N + V but as
N + v + zero pro-V, the antecedent V being usually present in the neighborhood. This accords with the absence after can and the like of the thirdperson -s which is found after all V.
The zero is actually a pro-morpheme of the V-phrase, including V P
constructions, the object N and V + P N 'indirect object': I'll go up if you
will, He likes the 19th-century but I don't. It is possible to have a pro-V with
an object different from the antecedent; but in that case the auxiliary is
included and we have a pro-vV: I got theftrst copy and he the second. 3o
In some constructions we can find, beside a full recurrence of the antecedent or a zero pro-V, also do it, do that, and do so as pro-V: I'll buy some
pictures (or: I'll go over) if you will ( ) too. But after so as a separate morpheme, the pro-Vis zero: I went over and so did he or and so will he. All these
too are pro-V-phrase, and have the internal structure of a V + object. The
original object can then recur as P N of the pro-V-phrase: They repaid Tom;
They did it to him but not to me.
After wh- the pro-V is -at ... do: I don't know what he will do or What will
(or did) he do? (the 'antecedent' in the following answer may be He disappeared, He sold the books, etc.).
These pro-V are usually bound, the antecedent appearing in another
sentence structure within the same sentence, or sometimes farther away in
the neighborhood. Some of them also occur free: Wait, I'll do it; He does
it with a flourish. All these contrast with do as a direct member of V: This
will do; When did you do the carvings?; I did them last summer. (Note that the
pro-V do it has no plural do them.)
Specific constructions have specific pro-V. For example, in He'll manage
better than I we have full recurrence (than I'll manage), zero pro-V (than I
will) and zero pro-vV (than /). In Some spoke French and some German we
have full recurrence (spoke German) or zero pro-vV. In /'/1 go rather than

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMATION

167

have you go we find full recurrence and any pro-V except zero (than have you
do it).
2.64. Pro-A, pro-S, pro-N-Pair
A few morphemes satisfy the conditions for being pro-morphemes of A:
this, that, and a number of words like aforementioned, other; also the second
morphemes in which, what.
Of greater interest are the pro-So In certain constructions and sentence sequences, this, that, it, so, zero, etc. operate as pro-S (or rather as promorphemes of S made into an N-phrase). The antecedent S (or nominalized
S) is often immediately preceding. The pro-S can always be substituted by
the antecedent, in nominalized form: I'll go down there myself - that should
do it (My going down there myself should do it); I don't like him - Why so?
(or So I see); He said he didn't do it, and I believe it (or I believe he didn't do
it). And the-y of why may be considered a pro-C S: Why would you choose
it? - I would choose it because it's easy.31
Among other pro-morphemes, we might note the crossreference words.
These occur as object of two N and a V, when otherwise the two N occur as
subject and object of that V: Men and women marry each other, but Men
marry women and Women marry men. The each other may then be viewed as
a pro morpheme of the N pair, distributing them in respect to the V.
2.7. Two- V Constructions

Constructions including two V (let go, want to have met, stop going, etc.) are
complicated in their details, and cannot be completely structured without the
aid of transformations. For our present purposes we will only note the main
types and characteristics, omitting many details. Constructions with to V,
Ving occurring alone (The first problem is learning; To learn is not enough)
will be considered not here but in § 4. In many of the constructions considered here and in § 2.8 only certain members of V occur, so that complicated overlapping subclasses of V are determined by these forms, i.e. by
whether they may be followed by V, to V, Ving, V N N, N, etc. In all cases
the second V lacks the v (tenses or auxiliaries) though in some cases it may
have the expansion of v, such as be ( )ing, have ( )en.
In all these cases both V are in the co-occurrence range of the preceding N.
If we find, for example, The dog came running, The clock stopped ticking, The
boy tried to cough, and The clock began again, ticking loudly, we can also find
not only The dog came, The clock stopped, etc. but also The dog ran, The
clock ticked, The boy coughed, etc. Both V are in the co-occurrence range of
the first N in N V N, Ving (sometimes even without the comma): The clock
tolled the hour, ticking loudly; but not for a sequence N V N Ving that never

168

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

admits of a comma (The stranger heard the clock ticking), where the second V
is not necessarily in the co-occurrence range of the first N. It follows from this
that in constructions of the first types indicated above, there is a particular
constructional relation between the first N and each of the V. This relation
could be expressed by saying that N is the subject of each V, or perhaps by
saying that the two V form a composite V phrase whose subject is that N.
We consider first the constructional relations in the simplest case, where
this problem does not come up: The phone-call reminded me to be rushing off,
He saw the car stalling on the tracks, He saw the car stall on the tracks. Here
the first N is (in general) in the subject range only of the first V, and the
second N is so for the second V. At the same time the second N is in the
object range of the first N V. The first V is always a V that can be (or always
is) followed by object N. Furthermore, when the second N happens to be the
same person as the first, it is replaced by a pronoun + self, as is general for a
same-person object: I reminded myself to go. When the second V happens to
be the same as the first, it recurs in full, not in pro-V: I remind you to remind
him. This is the only two-V form that has a regular passive: The car was seen
by him stalling (or: to stall) on the tracks. We may call this the N1 V1 N 2 +
N 2 V2 type; the V2 is of course a complete V-phrase, with or without an
object N.
We next consider I remember the dog barking there, His mates admired his
speaking out, We let the water flow, I like children to behave. Here the first N
is subject of the first V but not of the second (the second V is not necessarily
in the co-occurrence range of the subject N); the second N, however, is the
subject ofthe second V. Furthermore, the first V is always one that can occur
with object N; many of these first V (e.g. like) occur always with object N.
So far, the relations are the same as in the preceding type. The difference,
however, is that the second N is not necessarily one which is in the object
range of the first N V; note The scare made the girl scream. Even where the
second N is in the object range of the first N V, discourse analysis methods
may show that it is not so in the given sentence, and this will in general fit our
intuitive sense of the meaning: the person with opinions about behaving,
above, probably does not like children. Since something in the sentence has
to have the status of object to the first N V, we can say that if it is not the
second N, then it is the whole second N V, writing the whole as Nt V1
(N 2 V2)' While we cannot compare the co-occurrences of this whole class of
N2 V2 pairs with objects elsewhere, we find many of them, when their
structure is an N-phrase, occurring as object of the very same N 1 V1: I like
children's behavior, I remember the dog's bark (or barking); the sequence his
speaking out above can be analyzed as it stands as an N-phrase. 32
A related construction is seen in He avoided working, The longshoremen

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMA TION

169

wanted to strike. Here both V are in the range of the N as subject, and we
might think of a two-V phrase. Since in the previous construction, however,
we generally fail to find cases where the second N is identical with the first,
we can say that the examples before us are simply those cases of the previous
construction where the second N is the same as the first. That is to say, when
the second N is identical with the first, even as to specific individual, it is (in
general) represented by zero: 1 wanted to write is N 1 V1 (N 1 V 2) while 1
wanted you to write is N1 V1 (N2 V2).33
We now consider the constructions where we find in the position of to also
in order to, so that, and other sequences: 1 need a ladder for you to paint the
wall (also: in order for you to paint the wall). Here not only the second V (as
in the previous construction), but both V, are complete V phrases, each with
its object if it is a V that in general occurs with objects. Hence there is no
problem of seeking some part of the second N V which may be object to the
first. Each N is, by co-occurrence ranges, subject of the V after it. We can see
this type therefore as two conjoined N V structures, even though they are
connected by words like for (which we might not expect as conjunctions),
and even though the second verb has to instead of v. We may write it
N1 V1 CN2 V2·
We further find in order to and the like substitutable for to even without a
subject N for the second V: either because there is no second N at all (I rose
to speak), or because the second N is object of the first V and is perhaps not
in the subject range for the second V: 1 need a ladder to fix that spot, 1 want a
book to read). Here too we note that the preceding construction in general
lacked cases in which the second N is the same as the first, and we can say
that in general when the second N denotes the same individual as the first it
takes a zero form. The second V then has as subject a zero recurrence of the
first N, and is indeed always in the co-occurrence range of the first N. This is
N1 V1 CN1 V 2·
There remain some sequences V to V, and V Ving which are not easily
regarded as such N 1 V1 + N 1 V 2 combinations. This is because we have these
with a single N 1 but cannot obtain them naturally with N 2 ; hence we cannot
say that the zero is an N which happens to be the same as the first: I'll go to
sleep (we can hardly match this with I'll go for him to sleep or the like), We
begin to observe (no We begin for someone to observe), He tried to stop, He
tried stopping, I'll go on doing it. These constructions contain a small subclass of V in their first position, and this subclass may be considered an
auxiliary V which is added to many (though not necessarily all) V to make a
larger V-phrase. The second V is the head of this V-phrase, since the rest of
the sentence fits characteristically into the co-occurrence range of the second
V rather than of the first. These auxiliary V + to or + ing are indeed some-

170

SIR UCIURAL AND IRANSFORMA TIONAL LINGUISTICS

what similar to the is + ing, except that the latter occurs with all V, and also
that it precedes these auxiliary V.
2.8. V N N Constructions

Two chief types of constructions seem to have two object N after the V. In
one of these, e.g. give the fellow a book, ask him a question, the first N is
always one which also appears in the P N range of that Y (give to the fellow,
ask of him); the second N may be one which is not in that range (give tone to
a book, but hardly ask P a question). 34 Only a small number ofY, the subclass
Va, occur with such two object N.
A very different group is seen in The oil magnates made Harding president,
The committee named him an honorary member, We found the barn a shambles,
etc. The Y here, in general different from Va, comprise a subclass Vb. Neither
N is necessarily in the P N range of the Y. The distinguishing.property is that
the two N are always in each other's co-occurrence range (in the same order)
for the construction N 1 yn N 2 (where yn is a Y subclass including be, become,
seem, remain, etc.). That is, we can find sentences Harding is president, He
became an honorary member, The barn remained a shambles. Furthermore the
two N participate jointly in discontinuous morphemes which extend beyond
a structure, such as -s 'plural': He named them honorary members. 35
There are various constructions related to this one. Many members of yb
occur also with A or P N in the position of the second object N: They made
him enthusiastic, We consider him too unserious, The staff found him in poor
health. Other y, outside Vb, occur with A (and not N) in this second 'object'
position: throw the door open. Some members ofyb and some other V occur
with as, to be, etc. between the two N, and the second N position may be
occupied by Ying as well as by A or P N: I see this as their only hope, We
regard them as progressing satisfactorily, We consider him to be too unserious. 36
In the passive, there are two forms, both with the first N as passive subject:
He was named an honorary member by the committee and He was named by
the committee an honorary member; He was found (to be) in poor health by
the staff and He was found by the staff (to be) in poor health. The first form is
similar to the passive of V P constructions (N + V P + N) : He took the
project over, The project was taken over by him. In both cases the second
member after the V (an honorary member and over) comes right after the V in
the passive, when the first member, he and the project, appears as subject.
However, in the V N N case there is the alternative form with the second
member separated from the passive verb (named by the committee an honorary
member), which does not exist for the V P+ N case (there is no was taken by
him over). The same two passive forms occur for V N D: He shut the door

CO-OCCURREN CE AND TRANSFORMATION

171

quietly has The door was shut quietly by him and The door was shut by him
quietly. The passive placing of second post-V members seems therefore to be
a general property, and does not imply that all similarly placed second
members have the same constructional status. That is, we do not have to
judge that an honorary member has a relation to named similar to that of over
to took. 37
2.9. Summary of Constructions
A detailed analysis of the class constructions within each sentence type may
make it possible to say that, of two sentence types A and B, A has the same
construction as B except for the addition of some x: A = B + x. For example,
He didn't go=He went+not (§ 2.5). When we add to this a consideration of
the actual word choices (individual co-occurrences) we may be able to show
that a single n-class construction is satisfied by several different sets of ntuples, sets which occur elsewhere in different constructions. For example,
N P N is satisfied by one set of triples which also occur in reverse order
(N 2 P Nt), and by another set in which the two N may each occur alone in
the position of the N P N, and so on (§ 2.3). When we compare various
partially similar constructions we may find that one of them can be considered
a special case of another. For example, who went can be considered a special
case of an N V sentence (like Carl went) on the basis of considerations which
make -0 a special member of N (§ 2.1, § 2.6). And when we compare the
word choices in partially similar sentences (§ 2.2) or in neighboring sections
of a sentence (§ 2.1), we may find that undecidable or unique constructions
can be reinterpreted (by environmental considerations) as special cases of
known constructions, as when He knows more than I is shown to be He
knows+more than+I know. By so comparing sentences with similar or
neighboring sentences, we prepare the ground for showing that all sentence
structures are combinations or transformations of just a few simple sentence
structures.
In particular, we note (§ 2.3) various subtypes of D and of P (including
P P), to distinguish V P+N from V +P N, and V N+P N from V+N P N.
Within Nt P N2 we distinguish the parallel type (where both N1 and N2 are
substitutable for Nt P N 2), the majority type P N =A (where only Nl is substitutable for N1 P N 2), the type N P=A (where N z is the head and substitutable for Nl P N 2), the reversible type (where by the side of N1 Pi N2
there is also a substitutable N2 P j N l ), the compound type, and the P N P=P
type (which do not occur in Nl is P N 2).
Concerning C (§ 2.4) we note that they occur between two instances of the
same construction; i.e. given a construction Z containing C, it is possible to
find a subconstruction X immediately before C and another subconstruction

172

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

Y immediately after C, such that X and Y separately, and also X C Y, have
the same status within the next larger construction Z.
In § 2.5, a class v was set up, including the tenses -ed and zero (without
variant -s) and the auxiliaries will, can, etc. In the presence of not, emphatic
stress, question intonation, etc., the suffix members of v (the tenses proper)
move in front of their V to the position of the other v; they then appear with
do as phonemic carrier. In the presence of question intonation and certain
prefixed words, all v move in front of their subject N. There is also a v-phrase
expansion: have -en and be -ing between the v and the following V.
§ 2.6 defined a set of subclasses called pro-morphemes. A small subclass of
Y is called pro-Y if its X-co-occurrence range (for each constructionally
related class X) equals the sum of X-co-occurrence ranges of all members of
Y: e.g. the sum of V-co-occurrences of he, she, and it equals the sum of the
V-co-occurrences of all N. A pro-Y is bound if, in each sentence in which it
occurs, its X-co-occurrents when in that environment equal the X-co-occurrents of the particular Y which occupies a specified neighboring ('antecedent')
position in respect to the pro-Yo Free (not bound) pro-N-phrases: he, she,
it, this, etc. Pro-N: one, zero (§ 2.61). Pro-N (and -A) after wh- (§ 2.62) in the
wh- question, in N wh- Sz (bound to preceding N), and in wh- Sz as subject or
object of Sl (free). Pro-V-phrase: zero (bound), and free pro-V: do it, etc.
(§ 2.63). Pro-A and pro-S (this, etc.) and bound pro-N-pair (each other)(§ 2.64).
With the aid of the above, it is possible to analyze two-V constructions
into several types (§ 2.7): N I VI N z + N z V z The call reminded me to rush;
NI VI (N z Vz), the second sentence being object of the first, as in The scare
made the girl scream; N I VI (N 1 V2) as in He avoided working (the subject of
V2 being a zero recurrence of the subject of VI); N 1 V1 C N z V2 as in I want
a ladder (in order) for you to paint the wall; NI V1 C N1 V2 as in I want a
book (in order) to read; and VI to V2 or VI V 2 ing extended V-phrases
(where no second subject could appear before to V 2 or V zing) as in He tried
to stop.
In § 2.8, V N N constructions are analyzed into V N I N z as variant of
V N2 P Nt> for certain V, as in give him a book, give a book to him; and
N V (NI N z) for other V, the NI N2 being object ofthe V (and also occurring
in NI is N2 sentences), as in The oil magnates made Harding preSident.
From all this we can go on (§ 3.1) to show that in complicated sentences in
general the two or more sections are separate simple sentence structures
which have been combined in one of these relations or another.

3. TRANSFORMATIONS IN SENTENCE SEQUENCES
3.0. Certain sequences of two or more sentences have a special form for one

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMATION

173

of the sentences (usually the second): e.g. Some groups have rebelled frequently*, Some only rarely, or I've just been over there*,Oh, you were there?
In addition, many sentences which have what might be called complex
structures can be analyzed as containing a sequence of two or more sentences
or sentence structures, some or all of which have special forms: I met him
coming back. In all these cases the sections with special forms (Oh, you were
there? or him coming back) can be shown to be transforms of ordinary
independent sentences, in the sense of the definition of § 1.3. These transforms can thus be viewed as variant forms of sentences. Some of these
variant forms are positionally bound, occurring only in particular sentence
seqm,nces, e.g. Some only rarely or him coming back. Others also occur outside of the sentence sequences, e.g. Oh, you were there?
To obtain this result we first have to show that the sections in question
occur in specifiable positions with respect to other sentences or sentence
sections. Then we have to show that the sections in question are complete
sentence structures, in the sense that they contain the same constructions as a
sentence, with the same relations among these constructions. Finally, we
have to show that they are transforms of independently occurring sentences,
that is, that every n-tuple of morphemes that satisfies one of these special
variant forms also satisfies an independent sentence.
The first task has been partly covered in § 2, where special sections were
singled out from many sentence structures. These sections have various
grammatical relations, of course, to the rest of the sentence in which they
occur: in I hear he returned the he returned is the object of I hear; and in The
ticket which was lost is replaceable the which was lost is an adjectival phrase of
ticket. But that does not prevent these sections from having internal sentence
structures on their own. In addition to these special sections within larger
sentences, there is a host of particular sentence sequences, of which many
will be listed below. In all of these, the special sentence form is often characterized by particular features: question intonation, contrastive stress,
reduced main stress, special introductory words before the special (,secondary') sentence (and, though, etc.) or before both sentences (some ... some ... ,
some ... others ... , etc.).
The second task, to show that the special sentence forms or sentence
sections are complete sentence structures internally is accomplished by
methods of structural linguistics as in § 2.1 and of individual co-occurrence
as in § 2.2. It is primarily a matter of filling out the special form by showing
that it contains pro-morphemes or zero variants of elements which are
present in the neighboring ('primary') sentence or sentence section, and that
these can be filled out precisely up to the point of giving the secondary
section the internal structure of a sentence. This will be sketched in § 3.1.

174

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

Finally, the fact that these are indeed transforms will be discussed in Part4,
where both these and the other transformations of English will be listed.
The result of Part 3, then, will be to show that various types of sentence
sequence and of complicated sentences are the product of one sentence with
the transform of another sentence. There are certain transformations which
so to speak change a sentence into a noun-phrase or an adjectival phrase or a
subordinate or coordinate clause. That is, given sentence S2, such a transform of it T S2 occurs next to another sentence S1' with T S2 filling one of
these positions (N-phrase, etc.) within S1' There is no correlation in English
between the transformations and the positions they fill: several different
transformations - Tl S2' T2 S2' etc. - may fill the same position within S1
(e.g. there are several ways in which S2 may be nominalized and appear as
object of S1); and the same transformation T1 S2 may fill different positions
in S1' Quite apart from its transformational form, there are restrictions of
individual co-occurrence dictating which S2 will fill which positions in S1:
not all S1 S2 combinations occur.
3.1. Pro-Morphemes and Zero-Recurrence in Sentence Sequences

If we consider sentence sequences (or complicated sentence structures) in
which one section contains pro-morphemes, we can often show that the
pro-morpheme has the same co-occurrence relations as some particular
'antecedent' morpheme or word or phrase present in the neighboring
section (§§ 2.1, 6). Ifweconsider sections that are added to sentence structures
(but not I after He spoke there) or imbedded within them (committing myself
in I avoided [ D, and if we compare certain of these sections with whole
sentences, we find that there exist sentences which contain precisely the
words of these sections plus words that are absent in these sections but are
present in the neighboring one, e.g. I did not speak as compared with not 1.
Instead of merely noting the absence of such words from these sections,
we can say that the whole sentences have certain positions filled which are
empty in these sections. We put it this way because we can then proceed to
say that these positions are actually not empty but are occupied by zero
morphemes. We discover these zero morphemes by finding that the exigencies
of grammatical description (in particular the methods of §§ 2.1, 2) point to the
effect, in these sections, of certain elements which are not visible in them but
are present in neighboring sections; and instead of saying that the morphemes of the neighboring section reach over to affect the choice of morphemes in the other, we say that zero variants of those morphemes occur in
this other section and operate within it - or, equivalently, that when this
other section contains morphemes, identical with those of the neighboring
section, these morphemes may have zero as a variant form in that position.

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMATION

175

This effect (on our section) which is correlatable with morphemes of the
neighboring section, and which we thus attribute to the presence in our
section of zero variants of those morphemes, is the restriction of co-occurrence range for the various elements of our section. For example, in He spoke
there but not ( ), we may find various other N, not only [, but always such N
as are in the subject range of spoke. Hence we say that spoke recurs in not [,
though in a zero variant form.
The result of this analysis, as we have seen, is to find in each such sentence
sequence, or complicated sentence structure, a sequence or a combination of
two sentences, such that some morphemes recur in both sentences. These sequences then become merely a special case of all sentence sequences and combinations - the case when some morphemes happen to be identical in the two
sentences.
We now look upon these structures as sentence combinations in which recurring morphemes have been replaced by pro-morphemes or zero variants.
Whether the morpheme recurs in full or in pro-morpheme or zero form,
depends upon the particular type of sentence combination, on the class of the
morpheme, and on the position of the class in the sentence. Only sketchy
indications can be given here of the mass of detail.
In some sentence combinations there are certain positions in which a
recurring morpheme is always zero, for instance the A in That one is wider
than this one is (though a different A is given in full: That one is wider than
this one is deep). Similarly the second subject N in [ avoided going, the sentences
being [ avoided ( ) and [ went; a different second subject appears in full ([
avoided Tom's haranguing). In some sentence combinations there are positions
in which a recurring morpheme appears either in full or as zero. In He would
buy books rather than records (where he would buy is zeroed after than), we
can also find He would buy books rather than buy records (where only Nand
v are zeroed). Similarly we have Some people do Some people don't, as well
as Some people do Some don't. In some positions we find either full recurrence or pro-morphemes, but not zero, as for the second subject N in The
ideas kept changing as the ideas spread, more comfortably ... as they spread.
In some positions the recurring morphemes may appear either in full, in
pro-morpheme, or in zero forms, as is the case for most classes after and:
The man bought the books and the man sold the books, The man bought the
books and he sold the books, The man bought the books and sold the books. In
some positions a recurring morpheme always appears as pro-morpheme, e.g.
after wh-.
As to the effect on each class, some classes have no pro-morpheme, e.g.
the auxiliary and tense class v. Some classes are hardly ever zeroed by
themselves, e.g. v (perhaps in such forms as Well, [ might go and he stay).

*

*

176

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

The zeroing operates on constituents; thus the v V + N (object) construction
may recur in full (I'll take a copy and he'll take a copy too), or in pro-morpheme of the V N (I'll take a copy and he'll do so too), or in zero of V N but
full recurrence of v (I'll take a copy and he will too), or in zero of the whole
v V N (I'll take a copy and he too), or in pro-morpheme only of the N (I'll
take a copy and he'll take one too); other possibilities do not appear. In two
sentences connected by and, the recurring material around any constituent
can be replaced by zero, provided the and, together with the remaining
constituent, is joined to the corresponding constituent in the first sentence:
The cheap and dishonest electioneering continued can be derived by such
zeroings from The cheap electioneering continued and the dishonest electioneering continued. 38

The position in which the recurring morpheme takes a variant form is
specifiable, completely or partly, with respect to the particular sentence
combination. In the case of bound pro-morphemes and zeros the antecedent
is usually completely specified. In the case of free pro-morphemes, the full
morpheme will be replaced by a pro-morpheme in the second sentence or
after a subordinating conjunction, but hardly otherwise: Bill will do it if he
can; If Bill can, he'll do it; If he can, Bill will do it; but hardly He will do it, if
Bill can (in the last case He is presumably the pronoun of some other
antecedent).
3.2. Types of Sentence Combination

Establishing the antecedents of pro-morphemes, and placing zero morphemes
within sentence combinations, can show that these sequences or complicated
structures contain two or more sections, each of which has a sentence-like
internal structure. It remains to investigate the different types of combination.
In some of these combinations what we may call the secondary section becomes a full sentence as soon as the pro-morphemes and zeros are replaced
by the corresponding morphemes from the primary section. Examples are
the sentence sequences question-answer and assertion-question (The book
disappeared »« What disappeared?). Many irregular sentence structures
appear only in a context: I can't decide where to go »« Maybe to New York.
Here the second sentence is filled out to consist of the introducer maybe +
zero variant of subject I + zero variant of verb go + P N to New York
'answering' the pro-P N where. There are also matched introducers: Some
people will come »« Some won't or Others won't, where the second sentence
has zero for people and for come. Most conjunctions (and, or, either ... or,
more than, etc.) occur between two sentence structures that usually have a
single sentence intonation, and are in many cases not recognizable as two
sentences until the zeros are established. Yet another example is the wh- set

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMA TlON

177

(The fellow whose pen you lost is back = The fellow is back + You lost the
fellow's pen).
In other combinations the second section can be shown indeed to have the
constructional relations of a sentence among its parts, but the whole may
not have the external form of a sentence. Zeros and pro-morphemes may not
even be involved in it. Such are the V without v (but usually with -ing or to):
Being alone, he didn't go, where zero subject he can be shown before being;
For John to win, he would have to try harder or To win, John would ... with
zero John before to win; him coming in I met him coming. Such also are the
nominalized sentences imbedded in others: I resent his coming. And such are
the A Nand N P N and other constructions that will be seen below to be
extractable. In all these cases the sentence-like structures will be shown to be
transforms of ordinary sentences; thus, being alone and he being alone are
transforms of He is alone.
Aside from this question whether the filled-out section is a sentence or only
a transform of a sentence, we may consider another distinction: whether the
primary section is an independent sentence by itself or whether it requires
the presence of the secondary. For example, the primary is self-sufficient
before C S (conjunction + secondary S): The car rounded the corner and
stopped is filled out to The car rounded the corner + and the car stopped; I
like him better than her is filled out to I like him + better than I like her. It is
also self-sufficient when the secondary is a wh- phrase separated by comma
intonation, or a descriptive A or P N: Snakes, which have no teeth, can't bite.
And in the N V N z + N z V type of combination (§ 2.1): I met him returning
home = I met him + him (or zero he) returning home. Various members of
sentence sequences are also self-sufficient, e.g. an assertion or answer occurs
independently of the question.
In contrast with this there are structures in which the primary section does
not occur as a sentence by itself, without the secondary section either as a
constituent of the primary or as a neighbor, sometimes specifically before it
or after it. This may be because the structure of the primary is incomplete or
because the individual co-occurrences would not appear without the
secondary. Examples are certain matched introducers (e.g. On the one
hand .. .), or the N V N z + N z V type of combination when the shared N z is
a pronoun (§ 2.62: I saw who came = I saw who + who came or I saw
N; + N; came). In these cases the primary is not independent of the secondary
(though for different reasons). Another example is in nominalized sentences
which are subjects or objects of the primary: I think (that) he can, He said
'It won't do', I announced your coming, Bees buzzing around annoyed him
(where the primary is N annoyed him). Finally the primary is not independent
when the secondary is a wh- phrase without comma intonation, or a partitive

178

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

*

A or P N (such as Ai, Aj in Some Nk are Ai'
Some are Aj), because the
co-occurrences may then be different: one may find Dogs which bark don't
bite or A barking dog doesn't bite even if one does not find Dogs don't
bite.
Several additional distinctions characterize the various types of sentence
combination; some of these will become apparent as they are surveyed. In
the following pages the sentence combinations will be grouped by their
major structural features rather than by the transformations that appear in
them, since the latter will be summarized in Part 4. These structural classifications are the question sequence, matched sentences, conjunctions, wordsharing, nominalized sentences, and the wh- forms.
3.3. The Question Sequence

We consider sequences of sentences in which the second has zero recurrences
based on the first. A special case of this is the sequence of assertion and
He did? or Did he? or Who came, did you say?),
question (John came here
or question and answer (Who came? John or Did John come?
Yes, he
did). In each pair, the composition of one sentence can be described in terms
of its predecessor, and is indeed seen to be a transform of it.
When the question is of the yes-no type, it contains a particular question
element, the intonation, together with an optional interchange of v with
subject N. The answer may contain the words yes or no. Aside from this, in
the assertion-question and the question-answer pairs the second sentence
repeats the first. The repetition may have zero recurrence for everything
after the subject N+v (He'll come to you He will? and Will he come to
He will.), or for everything after N v V N (Did he take it yesterday?
you?
Yes, he took it.); or it may have zeros for the whole N v V N before any
added material (Will he get some today?
Yes, today.), or just for the N v V
Just these two?). Note
while repeating the object N (I'll take these two
that we cannot repeat the N v V and zero the object N (we cannot very well
answer Yes, he'll get or ask Will you take?). If the first sentence of the
sequence is of the Nt Vt (Nt V2 ) type (§ 2.7), the second V may be zeroed by
itself: I'd like to go
You'd like to? The second sentence may thus repeat or
zero the sections of its predecessor in any of the above ways: Will he take these
two today?
Yes, he will, or Yes, he will take these two or Yes, these two or
Yes, today. In addition, the second sentence may have bound pro-morphemes
in the manner that we have noticed for any secondary sentence: Yes, he will
take them or Yes, he will do so. But in all cases the zeros and pro-morphemes
are variants of their antecedent in the first sentence, so that the second
sentence is a variant form of a full sentence. Sometimes some of the zeros
are in the first sentence rather than the second. A notable characteristic of

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMA TION

179

this sequence is that the altered forms occur equally in the question or in the
assertion, depending only on which is the second.
When the question is of the wh- type, it contains wh- and its intonation,
with a pro-morpheme following the wh-. This may be a pro-subject N (-0,
-at, -ich) , pro-object N (-om, -at, -ich), pro-A (-ose; -at, -ich before N),
P + pro-N (-en, -ere, etc.), pro-V-phrase (-at do), etc. The part which is promorphemed in the question appears in full in the assertion, whatever the
order of the two may be. Aside from this, the special forms are as above. The
first sentence of the sequence, whether assertion or question, is generally
complete. The second sentence contains the post-wh- pro-morpheme (if it is
the question) or specific morphemes of the same constructional status (if it
is the answer), and the remaining sections of the first sentence may be
repeated, pro-morphemed, or zeroed just as in the yes-no question. 39
Since each question contains the same words as its neighboring assertion
(aside from interchanging you and I), we can say that it is obtained by a
transformation (from that assertion) which takes place in the presence of the
question elements. In the case of the wh- questions, there is the additional
transformation of substituting the post-wh- pro-morpheme as a positional
variant of the constructionally corresponding section of the assertion.
3.4. Matched Sentences

There are in English, in addition to the question-assertion pairs, other
sequences of matched sentences, namely sequences in which both sentences
contain the same words in all but one or two positions. Those sequences are
characterized by having contrastive stress or reduced stress on the second
sentence (the last, if there are more than two); and by having the possibility
of zero variants for the recurrent words in all but one of the sentences
(usually in all but the first). Since all these characteristics may be found in
other successions of sentences, one could say that the ones described above
are merely those successive sentences which have various words in common.
However, for transformational purposes it is convenient to consider these
sentence sequences separately, because they are marked by certain introducers or adverbial phrases which thus become transformation indicators.
The more obvious type is the case of matched introducers, in which all sentences of the sequence have either the same or related introducing words:
Some people are cynical ~ Some are not (also Some people are not or Some
are not cynical or Some are innocent, etc.). Another pair of introducers is seen
in Some people are cynical ~ Others are not etc. Since some ... some ...
seems to occur with the same sentences as some ... others ... , it may itself
be considered a transform of some ... others ... , quite apart from the relation
between the two successive sentences in each case. There are many other

180

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

matched introducers: A few ... afew ... , A few ... others ... , and in general
pairs of partitive adjectives (e.g. Reasoned decisions are sure to do some good
here »« Arbitrary ones are less so). In all these cases the subject N or the
whole subject N-phrase, and the object N-phrase or the whole V-phrase,
including the object, may have zero form in the second sentence (if the
words are the same as in the first); after partitive A there is usually a pro-N
(ones) for the subject, rather than a zero.
In another type of matched sentences we find all but one of the sentences
(usually all but the first) containing special D or P N (or even appositional
elements to the N and V sections), but otherwise repeating all or most of the
words of the primary sentence: The boys got home early »« They really did »«
And so did we, or Tim gets up early »« We all do. Here the V may be zeroed,
but not the subject N (except in particular circumstances).
The various sentences of a matched sequence are not transforms of each
other, since there is generally some difference even between their expanded
forms (aside from differences in the introducers), e.g. The boys got home early,
The boys really got home early, We got home early. However, each reduced
sentence is a transform of the complete sentences which we obtain by filling
in its pro-morphemes and zeros: They really did is a transform of The boys
really got home early. Each set of matched introducers constitutes a discontinuous morphemic element (some ... some ... , a few ... others ... ) which
provides the distinctive environment for the transformation. 40
3.5. Conjunctions

A somewhat different type of sequence is that marked by conjunctions (and,
since, etc.). Here we have two sentence structures joined by a morpheme of
the conjunction class C. In the case of some members of C the two sentence
structures always have a single sentence intonation extending over them:
He's taller than I am. For many other members of C the two sentence
structures sometimes have a single sentence intonation, sometimes separate
intonations (often with comma intonation on the first, reduced or contrastive
stress on the second): I'll go there if I can and I'll go there, if I can. Many
members of C appear sometimes with matched introducers: Some ... But
others ....
Another difference between conjunctions and matched introducers is that
the two or more sentences joined by conjunctions may have no words in
common, and yet the conjunctions or intonations may be the same as when
they have. However, in those cases where the two sentences have the same
words in corresponding positions, the occurrence of zeros and pro-morphemes
is much the same as in matched sentences. The details as to which positions
may be zeroed (or in some cases must be zeroed) differ for different members

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMATION

181

of C, and also differ when the C occurs with comma intonation. For many C
the subject N is never zeroed (butthe V often is): so for because, since, if, as
if, as, unless, though, while (The sailors got the raise because they had organized
for it; The children can see the trees nextfall if they don't thisfall).41 For some
C a large part of the primary sentence may be zeroed (or given in promorpheme or in full) in the secondary sentence; and for some C certain
positions of the primary sentence are always zeroed in the secondary: He is
quick rather than careful. For some C, if only one constituent in the secondary sentence contains different words from the primary, ail the repeated words
may be zeroed, and the remaining constituent may be conjoined directly to
its corresponding constituent in the primary. Thus we have He and I will
come, which we can derive from He will come and I will come, or I can and
will go from 1 can go and I will go. In varying degrees this is the case for and,
or, either ... or ... , but, as well as, that is, etc. The sections of the lead sentence
that are zeroed after and and a few other C have been indicated near the end
of § 3.1. A complete statement for all C involves a considerable body of
detail. 42
Most C occur before the second sentence; in the case of a few C the
sentence with C may precede the other: Since you won't, I'll go or Since you
won't go, I will. A few C are discontinuous, with one part occurring before
each sentence: Either you go or I will, If you go then lmay too. It is possible to
distinguish certain subclasses of C, such as coordinating and subordinating,
on the basis of the co-occurrence ranges within each sentence, or of the
relative positions of the sentences; e.g. whether each pair of sentences also
occurs in reverse order for the same C.43
As in matched sentences, each reduced sentence is a transform of the complete sentence which we can reconstruct on the basis of the primary sentence,
even though the reconstructed sentence has various sections which differ
from the primary. Each different rule for zeroing is a different though
related transformation, which takes place in the presence of the particular
members of C for which that rule holds. The transformation of note 41 is yet
another, for particular C. The original long sentence is not merely the sum of
the reconstructed sentences, but the sum of these with their conjunctions. 44
3.6. Word Sharing

In § 3.5 we saw cases of two sections joined by a conjunction; in most cases
one of these was clearly a sentence structure, while the other could be expanded into a sentence structure with the aid of the zero variants. Below we
will see cases which are often quite similar, except that they are not so
conveniently marked by a conjunction; they are complicated sentences which
can be shown to contain transforms of two or more sentences. In § 3.5 the

182

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

two sentences are simply joined by a conjunction, and then often words are
zeroed if they are the same as in the corresponding constructional position in
the conjoined sentence. In the new type below, the sentences always have a
word in common (otherwise they are not joinable), and they are joined by
sharing their common word; that is, the word occurs only once, so that the
two constructions which contain it overlap, or one is included in the other.
The secondary sentence does not in general contain zero variants, except in
that it does not repeat the word which it has in common with the primary
sentence; but it contains various transformational changes.
A case rather similar to that of conjunctions (of the type in note 41) is N V
Ving (I was there working), also N V, Ving (I was there, working), and N V to
V (I came to learn), and N V A or N V, A (We waited, breathless; also with
N-phrase or P N in place of A). Here the co-occurrence ranges show that the
subject ofthe second V (or of is A) is the same as the subject of the first V.
This can be analyzed as NI VI + zero conjunction + NI V2 (with the NI
recurrence zeroed, and with the further transformation of replacing the
second v by to or ing, or be + v). Or it can be analyzed as two sentences
NI VI +NI V2 (overlapping around the common N I , and with the same
further transformation as above).45 A special case of this is the appositional
sentence, e.g. The stranger, a Frenchman, could not understand from The
stranger could not understand and The stranger was a Frenchman.
In the cases above the shared word is in the same constructional status in
both sentences. When we have two sentences in which the shared word is not
in the same constructional status, we can no longer apply the zeroings that
occur with conjunctions; here the nonrepetition of the shared word can no
longer be considered such a zero, but must be due to a new method of
combining S.
We first consider cases like I asked him to deny it, We finally found it lying
in a corner, We saw it high above us. In all these cases the second N is both
the object of the first V and the subject of the second V. These are then
transforms of N I VI N 2 + N 2 V2 (We finally found it + It lay in a corner,
etc.). The transformations consist in the second sentence overlapping the
first around the common word (i.e. not repeating the common word), as
above; and in replacing the second v by to or ing, or dropping be + v
(e.g. from It was high above us). We can usually find the same underlying
sentences joined in a conjunction sequence, in the manner of § 3.5; but then
the transformations and the resultant are different (e.g. We finally found it
as it lay in a corner, I asked him if he would deny it; note that the meaning is
affected by the particular member of C).
When the common word is the object of both sentences, they overlap by
having the second sentence in the passive transformation: I bought a house

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMA TION

183

built by him from I bought a house + He built a house. Transforming the
second sentence into the passive makes this object into a special case of the
shared object-subject above, since a house is the subject of the passive. 46
A different case arises in sentences like The leaning tower collapsed, The
plane-grounding order was issued at ten, They designed a circuit with a servo,
and in general wherever an N has subsidiary A or P N phrases constructionally attached to it. In all the cases where the A N pairs also satisfy N is A
(leaning tower, and the tower leans) and where the N P N triples also satisfy
N is P N (the circuit is with a servo), we can extract two sentences, e.g. The
tower collapsed + The tower leaned or The order was issued at ten + The
order grounded planes. Any sentence, then, which contains N j in any position
can combine by word-sharing (i.e. by sentence-overlapping) with the transform of any sentence which begins N j is ( ); that is, it can so combine with
any construction whose head is this N j (e.g. A N j , or N j P N).47
3.7. Constructionally Included Sentences
Another type of sentence pombination occurs when a transform of one
sentence occupies a constructional position within another sentence: They
let the newcomer speak, where the newcomer speak is object of They let, but
neither the newcomer nor speak alone would occur as object. In the wordsharing combination the shared word fills a position in both sentences: in
I bought a house built by him, we find a house both in the object range for I
bought and also in the subject range for built by him. In such combinations
it is not even necessary to find any grammatical relation between the two
sentences, since each has its own complete structure; they simply overlap in
sharing a word. In the present case, however, only the subsidiary sentence
has a complete structure: the newcomer speaks, transformed by dropping the
v into the newcomer speak. The primary sentence does not have a complete
structure unless the subsidiary is taken as filling some status within it: They
let does not otherwise occur without an object, and neither the newcomer nor
speak but only their sum is in its object range.
In many cases of NI VI N z V 2, there is confusion or even homonymity
between the analysis above as NI VI (N2 V 2), with N2 V 2 as object, and the
word-sharing analysis NI Vi N2+N2 V 2 (§ 3.6). This is so because N2 may
happen to be in the object range of VI' yet in a particular sentence the object
of VI may be the whole N2 V 2 sentence. Whether a given NI VI N2 V 2
belongs to one type or the other can be discovered by noting what other
combining transformations are possible for the particular NI VI and N2 V 2'
For example, in Everyone heard my brother denying the story (in wordsharing analysis: N 1 VI N 2 + N 2 V 2 N 3), we find the same words also satisfying the transformation NI VI N2 C N2 V 2 N3 (Everyone heard my brother

184

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

as he denied the story), but in Everyone awaited the reports announcing
victory (NI VI [N2 V2 N 3 ], in included-construction analysis) we find the
same words also satisfying the transformation N I VI N 2 that V2 N 3 (§ 3.8 :
Everyone awaited the reports that announced victory) and not the conjunction
transformation. The distinction is also seen in the passive: My brother was
heard denying the story by everyone or ... was heard by everyone denying the
story, but The reports announcing victory were awaited by everyone. In such
cases, then, we can say that brother is separately the object of SI and the
subject of S2' while reports announcing victory as a whole is the object of Sl'
Both analyses apply in the case of homonymity: for The new pilot saw the
paper lying there in the corner, we have The paper was seen by the new pilot,
lying there in the corner and The paper was seen lying there in the corner by
the new pilot (both passives of N 1 VI N 2 + N 2 V 2, and both having the same
meaning); but also The paper lying there in the corner was seen by the new
pilot (passive of N 1 V I (N 2 V2), and with an appropriately different meaning).
When one sentence occupies a constructional position within another
(without word-sharing), the position which it occupies is that of an N. There
are many transformations that nominalize a sentence for such insertion,
among them N Ving (as above), N V without the v (the newcomer speak),
if or whether or that or zero plus N v V (I wonder if he went, I insist that he
went, I heard he went), that or zero plus N V without the v (I prefer that he
go, I insist he leave), for N to V (For him to go is foolish), N's Ving (His
leaving disturbs me), etc. (§ 4.3).
The N position which is occupied by the transformed sentence may be the
subject or object of the primary sentence, or virtually any other N, as in
P N after V in I count on his leaving, P N after N in The danger of his leaving
is past.

3.8. Sentences combined by whThe two types of sentences containing wh- (aside from questions, § 2.62) can
be analyzed as sentence sequences connected by wh-, with some N, P N, or
A of the secondary sentence S2 replaced by a pro-morpheme which stands
immediately after the wh- at the beginning Of S2'
In the first type, the wh- (plus the subsidiary sentence S2) occurs after any
N of the primary sentence Sl; the following pro-morpheme has this N (or
the first N of N P N) as its antecedent, though it may have any N or P N
status in its own subsidiary sentence: The fellow who passed, The fellow for
whom I got it or Thefellow who(m) I got itfor, The place in which it was and
The place where it was. The whole wh- + S2 thus occupies a constructional
position within Sl, being an A phrase of one of its N. It is comparable to the
word-sharing combinations (in particular to the last paragraph of § 3.6) in

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMATION

185

that S2 always has an N in common with S1' But the transformational
machinery is different, since the common word is not overlapped but repeated
in pro-morpheme (something which permits the use here of more complex
S2)' Other words in S2 which are identical with words of the same status in
S1 may be zeros as in parallel sentences. When the wh- + S2 is intonationally
separated it has the properties of a descriptive A: The report, for which I'd
been waiting all day, finally arrived. Otherwise it can occur in matched
sentences like a partitive adjective.
In this post-N type, a wh- word which is subject of its S2 may have a
variant that (The fellow that passed), and a wh- word which is object of S2
(or part of P N with the P at the end of S2) has variants that and zero (The
fellow I saw, The fellow that I got it for, The fellow I got it for). These are
subsidiary transformations of the wh- group.
The other main type has wh-+S2 after the V or V-phrase ofS 1. The wh-+
S2 occupies the position of subject, object, or P N of S1' depending on the
structure of S1. 48 The pro-morpheme after wh- has its own status within S2:
-0 is subject N, -om is object N, -at is N, -ere is P N; hence we find who saw,
whom I saw, in what I found it, what I found it in, where I found it, but not
where happened (where -ere would have to be subject). In this type the promorpheme is free, and has no antecedent in S1' There is thus no parallelism
or word sharing here between S1 and S2' and the relation between them is
the same as in the nominalized sentences of § 3.7. It is also possible, however,
to regard these as a special type of word-sharing combination if the promorpheme, rather than the whole wh- + S2' is considered to be the object,
subject, or P N of S1 (according to the conditions of note 48), and at the same
time to occupy whatever status it occupies within S2' The transformational
machinery in S2 is of course the same by either analysis.
In the wh- positions of this post-V type we also find wh- words + ever:
Whatever I do seems to be wrong. However, wh- words + ever, and whwords + certain special environments, occur in secondary sentences of the
zero-C type mentioned in note 41: Whatever you think, I'm going; I'm going
no matter what you say. We have here a wh- transform of S2 with a zero-C
combination of S1 and S2'
3.9. Summary of Sentence Sequences

We review all the cases where successive sentences are combined. In almost
all such sequences one sentence (often the first) is not transformed and may
be called the primary sentence. This can be determined for each type of
combination.
There are several different co-occurrence relations between the S. Two or
more sentences may each be completely independent of each other (except

186

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

for transformational effects, to be mentioned below), as in some S C S. All
but the primary sentence may be dependent in that some of their word cooccurrences do not appear in primaries, or in that S1 and S2 (with their
particular word co-occurrences) do not occur in reverse order with the same
connective (§ 3.2, some from § 3.4, some S C S, first type in § 3.8). Or all the
sentences may be dependent in that each contains elements that occur only in
the neighborhood of the other, as in contrasting partitive adjectives. The
question sentence may be considered completely dependent, since it is
identical with the assertion, except for transformations and the introductory
(or connective) question element.
There are also different constructional relations between the sentences in a
sequence. Two or more sentences may be grammatically independent. Or
one sentence may occupy an unessential position in the other, e.g. constituting
an A-phrase, or a P N, or an appositional N-phrase within the other (end of
§ 3.6, first type in § 3.8, and note 41). Or one sentence may fill an essential
position within the other, as its subject or object phrase (§ 3.7, end of
§ 3.8).
There are various types of connective between the sentences. In respect to
intonation there may be mere succession of two sentence intonations (§ 3.2),
or contrastive stress, or reduced stress or comma intonation on the secondary sentences; or the secondary sentence (in its transform) may simply be
included in the intonation of the primary (e.g. wh- forms without comma). In
respect to connecting morphemes there may be matched introducers,
question markers, conjunctions between the sentences or before each one
(and these 'coordinating' if the two S are reversible within the same text,
'subordinating' if not), P before a nominalized secondary sentence (note 41),
wh- of both types. Finally, the overlapping of § 3.6 may be considered a type
of connection, as also the positioning of 8 2 in the subject or object or other
position of S1 (§ 3.7).
The types of transformation, mainly in secondary sentences, are as
follows: pro-morphemes in all parallel sentences (§§ 3.2-5), and in a special
way in § 3.8; zeroing of parallel recurrent elements in parallel sentences
(with different details for different connectives); inversion after the question
element; and bringing the pro-morpheme constituent to the beginning of
8 2 after wh-; dropping ofv or be + v and in some cases adding to or ing to
V; and many nominalizations of the secondary sentence. In § 3.6 one can say
that the shared word is zeroed in the secondary sentence.
In many cases the same S1 8 2 sequence may occur with various connectives
between them, or with various transformations on S2' with the resultant
meaning either virtually the same or different according to the connectives
and the transformations in question.

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMATION

187

4. THE TRANSFORMATIONS OF ENGLISH
4.0. The following list presents the major English transformations in bare
outline. Each of these accords with the definition that the same n-tuples of
class members satisfy the two or more constructions which are transforms of
each other. A detailed discussion of each transformation cannot be given
here; the reader can test them himself, although in some cases more complicated methods may be needed in order to characterize and isolate exceptions or special cases. This is not a complete list. Perhaps it is impossible to
determine a complete list for any language; but this, if it is true, will not
affect either the practical or the theoretical use of transformations. The
transformations will be noted in three main groupings: those that occur in
independent sentences (S--.S); those that occur in sequential sentences
(Sl--,S2); and those that occur in sentences that occupy the position of an
N-phrase (S--.N). Minor groupings will be noted below.
4.1. S--.S

The main types here are passive, introducers, alternative order, and various
transformations of individual words.
4.11. Nl v V N2-tN2 v be Yen by Nl (passive): The children were drinking
milk, Milk was being drunk by the children. Morphemically, be -en looks like
one of the expanded members ofv. But whereas every subject-verb pair that
satisfies one member of v satisfies every other (The children drink, The
children were drinking, etc.), they do not necessarily satisfy be -en (we would
hardly find Milk drank). This be -en occurs after any member of v, including
the expansions be -ing, have -en; the suffix part of all three occurs after
the next verb morpheme in the sequence: The children + ed + be -ing +
drink + milk, Milk + ed + be -ing + be -en + drink + by + the children.
The N above represents any N-phrase. The V represents every V word, V P
compounds (those in which the P may occur at sentence end: They tore the
paper up), and certain other V + P: The paper was torn up by them, His
attempts were laughed at by everybody.49
When N2 is itself a transform of a sentence, we have two cases. Ifthe transform has the internal structure of an N-phrase, it is treated as such: The
liberal weeklies opposed his sending the troops, His sending the troops was
opposed by the liberal weeklies. If the transformed secondary does not itself
have an N-phrase structure (even though it occupies the position of an
N-phrase in the primary sentence), or if it is a word-sharing combination
rather than the object of the primary, then the passive of the primary
sentence has either or both of the following two forms (§ 2.7, § 3.7): Nl v V
N2 X+-+N2 v be Yen X by Nl or N2 v be Yen by Nl X (X represents whatever

188

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

follows N2 in the transformed secondary active sentence). Thus The crowd

trapped the secret police in their barracks, The secret police were trapped in
their barracks by the crowd, or The secret police were trapped by the crowd in
their barracks. 50 Any additional material in the original sentence (introducers,
D, P N) appears without change in the passive. The by ofthis transformation
is homonymous with by as member of p51; and in some cases the whole
transform of Nt v V 2 N3 is homonymous with the transform of N4 v V 2 N3
to which has been added by Nt (as a P N): They were seen by the front office
is a transform of The front office saw them but also a transform of N4 saw
them by the front office. The homonymy is made possible by the dropping of
N4 (§'4.4). Because oftbis homonymy we cannot say that all N2 v be Yen by
Nt+-+N t v V N 2, so that the transformation appears one-directional. 52
4.12. Introducers. There are a number of individual words or word
sequences which occur before any sentence, so that we have a transformation
S - Introducer + S. Some of these sequences are members of the classes
P N or D; others are N V or N V that. Examples: for V which do not occur
with objects, N v V - There v V N (A boy came, There came a boy); and
with certain exclusions, Nt v V N2 - There v V N2 Nt (At this point there
hit the embankment a shellfrom our own lines). Another such transformation
is S - There v be + certain nominalizations of S (§ 4.3): There was a

barking of dogs, There was much chasing of cats by the dogs, There are the
dogs chasing the cats, There will be people waiting there. 53
4.13. Certain similar introducers transform into an S any N (or A or P N)
word or phrase (not merely one which is itself transformed from an S): It or
There + v be (It's a report, There will be a report); this can be viewed as a
grammatical element making N into S (an ns element by note 2). Combining
this with other transformations (by wh- or word-sharing combinations)
yields various types of transformed sentences: N v V - It's N that V (It's
my brother that came, also with who or which or zero in position of that);
N v V _ There's N that v V; N v V + ( ) is A - It's Afor N to V (It's good
for him to try, via the nominalized first sentence occurring as subject of the
second: For him to try is good); etc.
4.14. Alternative orders occur occasionally in several constructions, chiefly
the following: Nt v V N 2-N 2 N1 V V (The public he always despised);
Nl v V N2 X+-+N1 V V X N2 (X being the rest of the nominalized sentence
whose subject is N 2 , or being the P of V P compounds, or certain D), as in
He threw the door open, He threw open the door. When of two sentences with
the same subject one is made secondary by dropping the v or v + be (§ 4.3),
the common subject may come before or after the remainder of the secondary: N, X, V+-+X, N V (He, an inveterate libertarian, opposed the measure).
The two sentences here are N is X and N V.54

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMATION

189

4.15. A few transformations can be set up in the environment of particular
subclass or individual words. For a subclass V8 which includes give and tell,
vg N1 N 2+-+V g N2 to N1 (give him this, give this to him). As an individual
example: N1 v be more A (or Aer) than N2+-+N2 v be less A than Nl (The sun
is larger than the earth, The earth is less large than the sun). But by no means
can all logical or semantic opposites be transformationally paired in such a
way. And even where this seems possible (for example between N1 v buy N2
from N3 and N3 v sell N2 to N 1), there are usually so many special cases as
to make these at best quasi-transformations (§ 4.5).
4.2. , S+-+S2

There are quite a few transformations which change an independent sentence
into a sequential one, these being the sentence combiners (or sequence
markers) of §§ 3.2-5 and § 3.8 with their attendant changes in the secondary
sentence (including the order changes of note 54). This includes bound promorphemes in general (including other, many occurrences of both, etc.);
the various distributions of zero recurrence for the various matched introducers, conjunctions, and other types of parallel sentences, including
question; the specific matched introducers, question markers (with their
you! I interchange), members of C, and wh-. All of these sentence-combiners
have specific meanings, something which is not clearly the case for other
transformations. We may consider these sentence combiners to be morphemic elements (which they generally are), and the attendant changes
to be transformations. Many transformations are common to a variety of
sentence-combiners, e.g. the zero recurrence. We may say then that the
main transformations which are limited to S2 position after various sentence
combiners are these: bound pro-morphemes, zero recurrence, and certain
order changes.

4.3. S+-+N
The final large group contains transformations which nominalize a sentence,
i.e. change to a form that can appear in one of the N-phrase positions of
another sentence. Note that the transformations of § 4.2 do not themselves
carry any structural function, for example to combine sentences or to make
them into questions; this is done by the morphemic elements that appear in
each case. Here we can say similarly that the various transformations do not
themselves nominalize their sentences, but that this effect is due to the appearance of the sentences in particular constructional positions within other sentences. The sentences then are N-phrases by virtue of their position; but the
transformations apply only when they are in these positions.
Almost all these transformations involve dropping the v (and often the

190

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

associated be, before A and N phrases); in most, the v is replaced by to or
-ing. Particulars are given in the next thirteen subsections.
4.301. Nl v V (N2)+-+Nl'S Ving «of) N 2), and Ving «of) N 2) by Nl (parentheses indicate occasional occurrence): your reading (of) these things,
reading (of) these things by you. 55 The result has an N-phrase structure, with
Ving as head, (of) N 2 and N l' S or by N 1 as modifiers (N 1 and N 2 being
themselves whole N-phrases with their own T, A, etc.); hence Ving may have
-s 'plural', and if it is subject of the primary sentence this -s will extend to the
V of the primary: Your reading of these things is incisive, Your readings of the
play are incisive. 56 N is N sentences (see note 49) occur only in the first of these
transformations, and without the of: your being a writer, the door's being open.
4.302. N v V +-+ Ving N, the N being the head of the resulting N-phrase.
Here the whole v, including its expansion, is dropped, so that the V is a single
word. The N usually is also a single word; the T and most A that preceded N
now precede the whole sequence Ving N: barking dogs; the dangerous barking
dogs. Although this transformation differs from the preceding in various
respects, homonymy between them is possible in a particular case: when
nothing precedes the Ving, and no T precedes the N2 above, and the Nl
above is dropped (§ 4.4), and of course when the N happens to be in both the
subject range and the object range of the V. Thus The lobbyist visited some
journalists ~ Visiting journalists (, he thought, might help his plans); Journalists visited the new premier ~ Visiting journalists (, he thought, might help
his plans). In those constructional situations in which homonymy is possible
the transformation is one-directional; for, given Ving N, we do not know
whether a pair V, N that satisfies it also satisfies N v V or also satisfies v V N.
The homonymy disappears if a long morpheme appears, because of the
difference in headship: Visiting journalists was indeed helpful, Visiting
journalists were indeed helpful. The present transformation holds for V
without object N. For V with object N it occurs often (as above), the object
being then either dropped or prefixed to the V: N2 -Ving Nl (often only a
nonce form: a journalist-visiting lobbyist).
4.303. N v V +-+ Ving ofN, with Ving as head: the barking of dogs. Here V
is as above, and homonymy is again possible with the transformation of
§ 4.301, when its subject Nl is dropped: in reading of plays, plays is transformed from the object (§ 4.301); in barking of dogs, dogs is transformed from
the subject.
4.304. Nl v V (N2)+-+Nl Ving (N2)' This does not have the internal
structure of an N-phrase; it occurs as object (after V or P), but not as
subject of another sentence, the N 1 having an object affix when it is a
pronoun (cf. § 4.308): They found the lobbyist (or him) visiting journalists. It
also occurs after C, in which case the Nl is subject (and often zero, if the

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMATION

191

parallel primary sentence has the same subject): They turned off, he going
first; Taking the hint, he went away. From sentences of the form N is N we
have, for example, They turned off, he being first.
The next group replaces v by to rather than -ing.
4.305. N1 v V (N2 ) +-+ for N1 to V (N 2 ). This transformation occurs when
its sentence is subject of another, or secondary to another; despite the for, it
is an N-phrase, not a P N-phrase: For him to visit journalists (is useless);
when the transformation is from the passive, for example, we have: He
praises paintings -+ Paintings are praised by him -+ For paintings to be
praised by him (is most unusual).
4.306. N1 v V (N2)+-+N1 to V (N 2), with N1 as head. This occurs when its
sentence is subject or object of another sentence: Actors to play the part (are
plentiful); (We want) him to visit journalists.
4.307. N 1 vVN2 -+ N2 to V : pain tings to praise. This transform of its sentence
may be found in any N position of another sentence. The N 1 is often present
nearby, often with some P preceding: (Good) parts to play are rare for him.
The remaining transformations contain neither to nor -ing.
4.308. N 1 v V (N 2)+-+ N 1 V (N 2)' This occurs when the sentence is object of
certain V (make, let, have, feel, see, hear, etc.) in another sentence: He took
it -+ (/ let) him take it. The whole v, including expansions, is dropped. Some
of these V of the primary sentence also occur with other transformations of
the secondary: / saw him take it, / saw him taking it. This transformation also
occurs, with other V of the primary sentence, after that or its zero variant:
I insist (that) he be there (from the sentence He is there), We demand (that)
he stop it. Here the N 1 does not have the object affix when it is a pronoun.
As elsewhere, the object affix is determined not by the transformation but by
the relation of the secondary sentence to the primary, i.e. by the combining
element, which in one case is that and in the other is object position; that +
S2 can occur as subject of Sl as well as object of Sl'
4.309. N1 v V (N 2) +-+ that Nl v V (N 2), or with zero variant of that. This
occurs as subject or object of other sentences, after particular V of the other
sentence: I believe (that) he went; I insist (that) he is there; That he took it is
certain. Although the same V of the primary sentence (insist) may appear
with this transformation and with the preceding one, it appears in the two
cases as member of different V subclasses, and the meaning is different.
4.310. Nl v V (N2)+-+'Nl V V (N 2),. Any sentence may appear unchanged
except for the intonation of quotation, after certain V (said, etc.) of the
primary sentence, its status being object of that V.57
Aside from participating in many of the v-dropping transformations
above, sentences of the form N is N (in the sense of note 49) have the following transformations.

192

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

4.311. Nl v be N2+->Nl N2 as object of another sentence (after certain V):
They considered him a police agent; also after some members of C (as, zero
C), in which case Nl does not have an object affix when it is a pronoun, and
often is zeroed: (As) a police agent, he was hunted down by the rebels. The
transform occurs in any N position of the primary sentence when N 2 is P N,
or when N 2 is marked off by comma intonation; the relation of the secondary
sentence to the primary is then of the word-sharing type. We see both cases in
The fellow from Paris, a small hamlet nearby, spoke up.
4.312. N is A+->A N in the word-sharing combination: The storm is distant
~ The distant storm (rumbled).
4.313. Nt has N 2 +->N!'s N 2 ; the result may appear (as a word-sharing
combination) whenever N 2 appears.

4.4. Many-One Transformations
Most of the preceding transformations are one-one in the sense that for each
individual sentence there is one transform and conversely (except for cases of
homonymity). The Nl v V N2~N2 to V (§ 4.307) is many-one, in that
various sentences (with different subjects) have the same transform. All the
v-dropping transformations may be considered many-one in this sense. Other
many-one transformations follow.
4.41. Free pro-morphemes, e.g. Nt v V ~ He (or She or It) v V. These
transformations are S~S and I(S)~I(S), where I(S) indicates transformed S.
For example, The Hungarians rebelled ~ They rebelled; The rebels' setting up
councils (led to a shadow government) ~ Their setting up councils ... IfI(S) is
a nominalization, its pro-morpheme is a pro-S (really pro-nominalized-S),
e.g. This led to a shadow government.
4.42. Dropping of by N, both in S+->S and in S+->N transformations; and
the dropping of N's andfor N in the S+->N group. In all these cases the sections that are subject to dropping have the structural position of P N and A,
positions which are sometimes filled and sometimes not filled (i.e. which may
structurally be considered droppable). As a result we have by the side of Milk
was being drunk by the children also Milk was being drunk; by the side of Your
reading these things also Reading these things; etc.

4.5 Quasi-Transformations
There are many cases in which two constructions fall short, in one respect or
another, of satisfying the conditions for a transformation. These cases may
nevertheless be of interest for various purposes, and may even be usable as
transformations in restricted applications. Here only a brief indication will
be given of the main types of quasi-transformations. 58
One type of failure to meet the conditions is that in which the domain of

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMA TION

193

transformation is smaller than a sentence. This is particularly of interest
when the domain covers everything except separable D and P N phrases
(those that can be separated by comma intonation), for example N 1 V V (N 2)
+-+N 1 V not V (N 2)' In the transformations of §§ 4.1-4 it is understood, for the
formulas given, that anything additional which occurs in the original
sentence occurs also in the transform. Here this is no longer true. All central
sentence constructions (subject phrase + verb phrase + Nand P N object
phrases), with most of the separable D and P N phrases, occur also with not.
But some separable D and P N phrases and other constructions do not occur
so, or else are altered when not is added: not would hardly occur without
further change in How silent it all seemed! or She looked up at last. This is the
case with some separable D and P N and some introducers, which occur with
every central construction but not with every (other) separable D or P N.
Even v can be considered a quasi-transformation of this type: N 1 + present
tense + V (N2)+-+NI V V (N 2), or N V (N2)+-+N v V (N 2); in the second
formulation the starting point N V is not a full sentence. We can go on from
here to consider additions which have no restrictions of co-occurrence on the
classes near them, but do have restrictions on the members of classes
elsewhere in the sentence.
We have another failure to meet the conditions when the set of n-tuples
that satisfies one construction is only partly similar to the set that satisfies
the other construction, or almost but not quite identical with it. This is the
case, for example, when the transformation holds for some not readily
stateable subclasses. Thus, for certain subclasses of N I and N 2 we have the
relation NI is N2+-+N2 is NI.1t is also the case when the transformation holds
for many but not all the members of a class, as in such individual quasitransformations as N v V+-+N v succeed in Ving, or N v V+-+N v be able to V,
or for the examples of § 4.15 and notes 52 and 56. We have such incompleteness, for example, in the quasi-transformation V Aly -+ A Ver (walk
slowly, slow walker), or in the various transformations that apply to various
triples in the N P N construction (for example, there are some subclasses for
which NI P 2 N3-+N3 P4 NI holds: groups o/people, people in groups). Other
construction pairs which are partially satisfied are Nl P N2 and N2 na N l ,
or VI P N2 and VI N2 na Iy (a push with energy, an energetic push, he
pushed with energy, he pushed energetically).
Quasi-transformations of this incomplete type show certain relations
between the constructions concerned. Furthermore, many of them are
productive; that is, co-occurrences which are present in one of the two constructions but lacking in the other frequently appear in the second as new
formations, thus making the co-occurrences in the two constructions more
nearly similar. Constructions related by quasi-transformations may be a

194

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

major avenue for productivity, as the extension of morphemes to co-occurrents or constructions in which they had not previously appeared.
A third failure to meet the conditions for a full transformation appears
when a quasi-transformation specifies for one of its components a class
rather than an individual morpheme. This may happen if we can say that for
certain N subclasses, N 1 ofN 2 -> N 2 P N 1; but the choice of P depends on the
individual members of N. Or if for given subclasses, NI P N2->N2 na N 1 ;
but the choice of na depends on the particular co-occurrence of na with N
(wooden but national etc.). Such relations are more useable if the class whose
member remains to be specified is a small class. Even when the class is a large
one, however, such a relation may be of interest, if some particular situation
is afoot. For example, for many V we have V1 -> Vi VI vn. That is, the VI
appears in nominalized form preceded by a new Vi; the new Vi (and its choice
depends on the V1) does not have here any of its usual meanings, but contributes some aspectual meaning while verbalizing the V1 vn: give a push, take
a look, take a step, do a dance, make an analysis, etc. Here too the quasitransformational relation seems to be productive.
Cases of this type can be formulated by saying, for example, that for each
N-pair (out of a subclass of N-pairs) there exists a particular (choice of) na,
such that N1 P N 2 ->N z na N 1.
A fourth type of quasi-transformation appears when part of an addition to
a construction has transformational or quasi-transformational status, while
another part has not. Thus, N v make or N v let can be added as primary
sentence to almost any other sentence (the secondary having the transformation of § 4.308), but the choice of N depends in part on the individual
words of the secondary.
Finally, some transformations may hold only if particular words are
present in neighboring sentences. These are textually dependent transformations (§ 5.7).
5. THE PLACE OF TRANSFORMATIONS IN LINGUISTIC STRUCTURE

5.1. Elementary Transformations
The difference between any two constructions which are satisfied by the same
n-tuples of their word classes comprises a transformation. When we compare the constructional differences that are contributed by various transformations we may see that one such difference is the sum of two others; that
is, the effect of one transformation can be obtained by successive application
of the other two, perhaps in a particular order. For example, N1 v V N 2-+
N2 v be Yen (/ saw him, He was seen) is obtainable by the ordered succession
ofN1 v V N 2 -+N z v be Yen by N1 (§ 4.11) and S by N 1-+S (dropping by N 1,

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMA TION

195

or more generally dropping a separable P N, § 4.42). Furthermore, comparison of various transformations may show that these can be combined
out of certain elementary changes, even if these do not occur by themselves.
Any transformation which is not obtainable by combining the effect of two
or more other simpler transformations will be called an elementary transformation.
5.2. The Algebra of Transformations

The existence of elementary transformations makes it possible to regard all
transformations as compoundings of one or more elementary ones. There
are a great many transformational relations among constructions, e.g.
N1 v V N z -+ by wh + pro-morpheme v be N1 Yen ? is a transformation
(The workers rejected the ultimatum, By whom was the ultimatum rejected?).
The list in Part 4 is relatively short because it is in approximately elementary
terms; the transformation just cited is not listed, but can be obtained from
§ 4.11 plus the question transform of § 4.2.
If we now consider a transform to be the effect of perhaps several elementary transformations, rather than always of just a single transformation, we
have to see in what way the various elementary transformations can occur
together. Here we have to bring into consideration the fact that transformations are restricted to particular structural environments. This is most
obvious for the transformations of § 4.2 and § 4.3, since, for example, zero
recurrence appears only in secondary parallel sentences, and dropping of v
without replacement by to or -ing occurs only after certain V (make, let, etc.).
But it is also true for the other transformations, since, for example, the
passive occurs only for sentences with N v V N structure, hence not for N is
N.59 In view of this, we have to recognize that a given transformation does
not apply to all sentences. And a given transformation T1 operating on an
appropriate sentence S1 may leave the structure of S1 altered in such a way
that another transformation Tz , or for that matter Tl again, cannot be
applied to the altered T1 S1 even if it could have been applied to S1 itself.
For example, the passive Tp carries S1 The Hungarian workers staged a sitdown strike into Tp S1 A sit-down strike was staged by the Hungarian workers;
but to the resultant Tp S1 we can no longer apply Tp (to yield Tp Tp S1),
because the resultant has the structure N v V P N, which is not in general
subject to Tp (see note 49).
It is sometimes possible to analyze the observed transformations into elementary ones in more than one way; and for each different analysis, the
detailed algebra of how these elementary ones are compounded to yield the
observed resultants will be correspondingly different.
The successive application of elementary transformations can be called their

196

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

product. For example, the sentence May there be mentioned now a certain
secret? c~n be derived from N may mention now a certain secret by the product
of transformations Tp Td 7; Tq described in §§ 4.11, 42, 13, and 2 (question)
respectively; along the way we have Tp S (A certain secret may be mentioned
now by N), Tp Td S (A certain secret may be mentioned now), Tp Td 7; S
(There may be mentioned now a certain secret). Some products may not occur;
or they may occur in one order but not in the other (e.g. Td , dropping of by
N, obviously occurs after but not before Tp). But this situation may be partly
remedied by regarding certain transformations as positional variants of
others.6o Furthermore, all products may be said to occur, vacuously in some
cases, if we say that wherever Tj S does not observably occur (where S itself
may be the resultant of various transformations), Tj will be said to occur
with the identity value. That is, identity is treated as a positional variant of
Tj for all positions where Tj does not otherwise occur. Under this view,
Tp Tp S for example occurs, but equals Tp S. This rather Herculean solution
is of course of no interest except in cases where particular useful results can
be obtained from it. Where products of particular transforms do occur in
both orders, the result mayor may not be the same; it usually is, e.g.
Tp Tq Sj=Tq Tp Sj.
lt is clear that we have here a set of transformations with a base set (the
elementary transformations), with products of the base members yielding
the various other members of the set. Multiplication in the product may be
associative (in the mathematical sense), and it may be commutative, depending on the properties of the transformations in the particular language
and in part on how the various elementary transformations are defined. We
can now define an identity transformation as one which leaves an S unchanged. An inverse can then be defined for each transformation, as that
which will undo the effect of the transformation in question: the inverse
Tp-l of Tp is N2 v be Yen by Nl-+Nl v V N 2. The inverse Tj-l, however, is of
limited algebraic interest, because it usually occurs only after Tj, and will not
combine with other T.

5.3. Addition (Concatenation) of Transformed Sentences
Many of the transformations appear only when their sentence occurs with
another, in some secondary status to that other. Which particular sentences
occur together is a matter of co-occurrence, like which members of two
classes co-occur in a sentence. But how the sentences with their sequential
transformations combine is of interest as showing an operation among
transformed sentences, different from that of § 5.2.
We have seen three general types of sentence-combining, each with its
characteristic transformations: parallel sentences, overlapping sentences (by

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMATION

197

word-sharing), and sentences nominalized as subjects or objects of others.
These can be combined and recombined, so long as the conditions for
applying them are satisfied; but each combination requires a new sentence to
co-occur with the others. As an example we take the rather involved sentence
For the refugees from Budapest to have made so much of my arranging their
border-crossing seemed to me sadder than anything else they did. Here The
refugees cross borders (with pronoun they) is nominalized as object of I
arranged ( ). This in turn is nominalized as object of The refugees have made
so much of ( ). This overlaps The refugees were from Budapest; and it also is
nominalized as subject of ( ) seemed sad to me. The latter is conjoined by -er
than with the zeroed parallel sentence ( ) seemed sad to me whose subject (the
only part of the parallel sentence not zeroed) is anything else, to which is
added by sentence overlap the wh- transform of they did anything else (with
zero variant of the which pronoun of anything else, and they pronoun of the
correspondingly placed the refugees). Various sentences or combinations
here, including the whole, could carry various non-sequential transformations
of the type of § 5.2, within the limits of their application. For example, the
complete sentence could take the question transformation, aside from
considerations of style (which could be lightened by using a different nominalization at the beginning).
5.4. The Kernel

It follows from §§ 5.2 and 5.3 that each sentence in the language can be
expressed in terms of sequential and nonsequential transformations. Given
any sentence, we can check it for all transformations; we will then find the
sentence to consist of a sequence of one or more underlying sentences - those
which have been transformed into the shapes that we see in our sentence with various introductory or combining elements (as in § 3). We have thus a
factorization of each sentence into transformations and elementary underlying sentences and combiners; the elementary sentences will be called
sentences of the kernel of the grammar. Any two different sentences will have
different factorizations, either the kernel sentences or the transformations
being different; but one sentence may have two different factorizations, since
two one-directional transformations (applied to partly different kernel
sentences) may yield the same resultant sentence (homonymy),61
The kernel is the set of elementary sentences and combiners, such that all
sentences of the language are obtained from one or more kernel sentences
(with combiners) by means of one or more transformations. Each kernel
sentence is of course a particular construction of classes, with particular
members of the classes co-occurring. If many different types of construction
were exemplified by the various kernel sentences, the kernel would be of no

198

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

great interest, especially not of any practical interest. But kernels generally
contain very few constructions; and applying transformations to these few
constructions suffices to yield all the many sentence constructions of the
language. The kernel constructions of English seem to be only these:
N v V (for V that occur without objects)
N v V P N (for P N that have restricted co-occurrence with
particular V)
NvVN
NisN
N isA
NisPN
N isD
In addition there are a few minor constructions, such as
N is between Nand N.

There are also some inert constructions which hardly enter into transformations (except quotation):
e.g. N!, Yes. 62
Finally, there are the combiners and introducers of § 3, and the intonationally separable introducers and D and P N phrases, all of which occur with
any kernel sentence. The V in these formulas includes V P compounds and
V D; the A includes D A; the N includes compound N and special forms like
unitary (compound) N P N, and carries various T and post-T words (quantifiers etc.) as well as -s 'plural'.63
Different decisions at various points in the analysis of transformations will
yield a somewhat different set of kernel structures. The result, however, will
not make a great deal of difference for the picture of the structure of the
language, and even less for the structure of language in general.
Kernel sentences contain in general no parts that repeat elements elsewhere in the sentence or in other sentences near-by; such repetition has been
eliminated by the setting up of independent elements (independent within 1)
sentence) in structural linguistics, and by the removal of dependences on other
sentences in the course of transformational analysis. 64 The importance of
this independence among kernel sentences is that the further grammar, the
grammar of how kernel sentences are built up into the actual sentences of the
language, does not have to specify very closely which kernel sentences are to
be combined with which, except for the relatively loose restrictions of cooccurrence that hold among sentences. If two kernel sentences nevertheless
have a special co-occurrence relation to each other, this must be stated in the

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMATION

199

grammar of constructions beyond the kernel - the grammar which contains
the transformations and any other information that may be required to build
all sentences.
In addition to exhibiting the minimal sentence constructions, the kernel
sentences are thus also the domain of the major restrictions of co-occurrence
in the language. The restrictions that determine which member of a class
occurs with which member of its neighbor class are contained in the list of
actual sentences that satisfy each of the kernel constructions. By the nature
of transformations, they do not affect these co-occurrences. The word-cooccurrences in all sentences of the language are in general those of the kernel
sentences, so that the only restrictions that remain outside the kernel are the
much looser ones determining which sentences combine with which. In view
of this, one may raise the question whether the kernel sentences may not be
subdivided further into minimal domains of co-occurrence restriction, out of
which the kernel sentences would then be built according to the grammar of
kernel constructions (chiefly by means of a word-sharing combination of
those minimal domains). In effect, this means extracting N V, V N (object),
V P N, V D, and D A out of the structures which contain these (and the
various compound words), and combining, say, N j Vj + Vj Nk to yield a
sentence N j Vj N k •
5.5. Effect of Transformations in the Language Structure

Transformations have some particular effects in the over-all structure of the
language. They make possible an unbounded variety and length of sentences
out of the stock of kernel sentences, thanks to the unbounded repeatability
of various sequential transformations. They give an organized view of complex sentences (cf. Parts 2 and 3). As a result, they provide solutions for the
structure of some constructions which are hardly solvable in the usual
linguistic terms, for instance the structure of flying planes in Flying planes is
my hobby; and can explain what are the differences in the two structures of a
homonymous sentence (e.g. They appointed a fascist chief of police: both A
fascist is chief of police transformed as object of They appointed ( ), and
(The) chief of police is a fascist transformed as word-sharing overlap in They
appointed a chief of police).65
Transformations can specify in general the differences and the similarities
among sentences. Consider for example these four very similar sentences:
Sl Mary has a sad fate.
S2 Mary's fate is sad.
S3 Mary'sfate is a sad one.
S4 Mary's is a sad fate.

200

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

These are transformed from some or all of three kernel sentences:
Kl Mary has afate.
K2 Fate is a fate.
K3 Fate is sad.
The following transformations are involved:
For SI: K 3 , overlap with K 1 •
For S2: K 1 , N has N --+ N's N, overlap with K 3 •
For S3: K l , N has N--+N's N, overlap with K2 (first N);
K 2 , pro-N of second N;
K 3 , overlap with K2 (second N).
For S4: K l , N has N--+N's N, overlap with K2 (first N);
K 2 , zero recurrence of first N;
K 3 , overlap with K2 (second N).
It is of interest to see that these sentences, which we would intuitively describe

as semantically equivalent or almost equivalent, have the same kernel sentences - except that some of them lack K 2 , which we would hardly expect to
contribute a semantic change - and differ only in transformations.
Transformations often overcome structural restrictions of the kernel
grammar. For example, the subject of a sentence is always present in English;
but it can be dropped by transforming into the passive and then carrying out
the drop transformation of § 4.42.66 Or a sentence N v V, without object or
even P N, can be given the passive transformation by first applying a proV-phrase transformation (§ 4.41): He stumbled unexpectedly, He did it
unexpectedly, It was done by him unexpectedly.
In many cases, transformations add flexibility in a direct way. They may
change the grammatical status of a sentence into that of an N-phrase, thus
making it possible to relate the sentence to an outside N V or V N, etc. They
may bring out one part of the sentence for primary attention. And of course
they yield stylistic variations.
5.6. Co-Occurrence and Transformation ill Structural Theory

Important properties of linguistic structure are definable with respect to
co-occurrence and transformations. Those constructional features of
grammar which are well known from descriptive linguistics are in general
limited to the kernel. In the kernel, the constructions are built up as concatenations of various included constructions, down to morpheme classes;
various classes or sequences of classes (and their members) are substitutable
for each other in particular positions of these constructions. Transformations
cannot be viewed as a continuation of this constructional process. They are

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMATION

201

based on a new relation, which satisfies the conditions for being an equivalence relation, and which does not occur in descriptive linguistics. All
sentences which are described in constructional terms must have a specific
constituent analysis, since the constructional analysis proceeds in terms of
immediate constituents (component subconstructions). This is not necessary,
however, for all sentences in transformational analysis. Some of the cruces
in descriptive linguistics have been due to the search for a constituent
analysis in sentence types where this does not exist because the sentences are
transformationally derived from others. For this and other reasons a
language cannot be fully described in purely constructional terms, without
the transform relation. 67
Some of the special operations on constructions which are set up in
descriptive linguistics can be described in terms of transformations instead.
For example, much of the expansion of constructions (e.g. A N = N, i.e. A N
is substitutable for N) is obtainable as a result of the sentence-overlapping
transformations; this will be more general if the kernel constructions are
subdivided into co-occurrence domains (§ 5.4, end). Transformations have
partial similarity to certain elements and relations of descriptive linguistics.
Most important of these is the similarity of transformations to variants, both
free and positional. However, if A is to be a variant of B, A must be substitutable for B, or must have environments complementary to those of B,
and the environments of A and B must be otherwise identical. These conditions cannot be explicitly met in the case of sentences because in descriptive
linguistics environments are defined only up to sentence boundaries.
A major difference between the kernel and the rest of the language structure
is that the individual co-occurrences among members of classes are in
general contained within the kernel. The kinds of problems that are associated
with this - for example the statistical determination of co-occurrents, the
scaling of acceptance of co-occurrents, the differences among samples - all
refer to the kernel. Between the kernel and the transformational structure it
may be convenient to recognize a border area containing some of the types of
quasi-transformations and productivity.
Finally, as has been mentioned, the kernel (including the list of combiners)
is finite; all the unbounded possibilities of language are properties of the
transformational operations. This is of interest because it is in general
impossible to set up a reasonable grammar or description of a language that
provides for its being finite. Though the sample of the language out of which
the grammar is derived is of course finite, the grammar which is made to
generate all the sentences of that sample will be found to generate also many
other sentences, and unboundedly many sentences of unbounded length. If
we were to insist on a finite language, we would have to include in our gram-

202

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

mar several highly arbitrary and numerical conditions - saying, for example,
that in a given position there are not more than three occurrences of and
between N. Since a grammar therefore cannot help generating an unbounded
language, it is desirable to have the features which yield this unboundedness
separate from the rest of the grammar.
Our picture of a language, then, includes a finite number of actual kernel
sentences, all cast in a small number of sentence structures built out of a few
morpheme classes by means of a few constructional rules; a set of combining and introducing elements; and a set of elementary transformations,
such that one or more transformations may be applied to any kernel sentence or any sequence of kernel sentences, and such that any properly
transformed sentences may be added sequentially by means of the combiners.
The network of individual co-occurrence in language can provide more
analysis of linguistic structure than is involved in transformations alone.
The co-occurrences can provide us with a relation in language with respect
to which we can discover a system of algebraic structures and algebraic
relations in language. The central method here is to set up for each construction of two or more classes C l , C 2 , ••• a correspondence which associates
with each member of C l those members of C z that occur with it in that
construction, and so on. The mappings differ for different constructions;
several of them are many-valued, and the individual associations vary for
different samples. It turns out, however, that permanent structures can be
permanently characterized by particular types of mappings. The different
structures so distinguished turn out to be significantly different in the
economy of the language.
5.7. Applications

Transformations are applicable in various studies or utilizations of systems
of a generally linguistic type. There are specific applications, for example, in
linguistic typology - comparison of different types of language structure. 68
The chief outside uses of transformations, however, depend upon their
special meaning status. Meaning is a matter of evaluation, and cannot be
fitted directly into the type of science that is developed in structural linguistics
or in transformation theory. Still, for various purposes it may be possible to
set up some practical evaluation of meaning; and with respect to most of
these evaluations, transformations will have a special status. That many
sentences which are transforms of each other have more or less the same
meaning, except for different external grammatical status (different grammatical relations to surrounding sentence elements), is an immediate impression. This is not surprising, since meaning correlates closely with range
of occurrence, and transformations maintain the same occurrence range.

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMATION

203

When we have transformations which are associated with a meaning change,
it is usually possible to attribute the meaning change to the special morphemes (combiners, introducers, subclasses of the primary V) in whose
environment the transformation occurs. To what extent, and in what sense,
transformations hold meaning constant is a matter for investigation; but
enough is known to make transformations a possible tool for reducing the
complexity of sentences under semantically controlled conditions.
It is possible to normalize any sequence of sentences by reducing each one
to its kernels and their transformations. The text then becomes longer, but
its component sentences are simpler, as is the kernel grammar according to
which they are written. The kernel sentences are then available for comparison or arrangement, both within the discourse and as among discourses,
in a way that the original sentences were not. Transformations can be
checked by comparing the textual environments of a sentence and its transform, to see whether, say, a given N V N triple which occurs in a given
environment of other sentences will also occur in the same environment when
it is transformed to the passive. Methods of this kind can be used to make
various quasi-transformations acceptable as transformations in a given
discourse, or to make one-directional transformations useable in both
directions.
Transformations are much needed in discourse analysis; for though the
method of discourse analysis is independent of them, the complexity of many
sentences makes discourse analysis hardly applicable unless the text has first
been normalized by transformations. For discourse analysis it is often not
necessary to reduce sentences to their kernels, but only to transform those
sentences and sections which contain the same words in such a way that they
have the same structure, if this is possible.
NOTES
1 The study of transformations arose out of the attempt to construct a method for analyzing language samples longer than a sentence; a preliminary list of English transformations
is given in Z. Harris, 'Discourse Analysis', Lg. 28 (1952), 18-23 (Paper 7 of this
volume). Although the present paper was presented at the 1955 meeting of the Linguistic
Society in Chicago, some of the detai Is on English transformations have been added since
that time, in connection with a project of the National Science Foundation.
From a time when this work was still at an early stage, Noam Chomsky has been
carrying out partly related studies of transformations and their position in linguistic
analysis: see his dissertation, Transformational Analysis (University of Pennsylvania,
1955); and his paper 'Three Models for the Description of Language', IRE Transactions
on Information Theory, IT-2, No.3 (1956),113-24; now also his book Syntactic Structures,
The Hague 1957. My many conversations with Chomsky have sharpened the work presented here, in addition to being a great pleasure in themselves.
2 Notation: Morpheme and word classes: N (noun) and V (verb) as above; A (adjective)
includes large, old, extreme, etc.; T (article) includes the, a; P (preposition) includes of,

204

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

from, to, etc.; C (conjunction) includes and, or, but, etc.; D (adverb) includes very, well,
quickly, etc. Classes of affixes (mostly suffixes, some prefixes): na indicates an affix such
that N + na (i.e. the sequence N na) yields an A word (a word substitutable for A morphemes): papery, cloth-like. Similarly vn after V yields an N word: growth; nn after N
yields an N word: growths, childhood; and so on. And v (tense and verb 'auxiliary' class,
§ 2.5) includes oed will, can, etc. S stands for sentence. The equivalence A=B indicates that
if sequence A occurs in a sentence, the substitution of B for A also yields a sentence. All
these classes apply specifically to English; the analyses and transformations below have
been set up for English data, although the principles are general and not limited to any
particular language.
3 It might be argued that individual co-occurrence is essentially different from morphological classification simply because it is a direct reflection of the speaker's combinations
of meanings, and is therefore not subject at all to investigation for distributional regularities. No doubt the speakers' meanings, or the knowledge and perceptions of the body of
speakers, is a major factor in building up the co-occurrence set of each morpheme. But
linguistic productivity, and other factors which are determined at least partly by structural
and historical factors, also affect co-occurrence: different noun-making suffixes occur in
avoidance and evasion for no semantic reason; killing occurs in a ( ) sense 0/humor but perhaps not in a ( ) laugh. Furthermore, it frequently happens that morphemes in one of their
co-occurrences have idiomatic meanings which cannot reasonably be drawn from the meanings of the component morphemes in any other occurrences, so that one can hardly claim
that the occurrence in question was based on the meaning of the morphemes. Nor can one
easily predict what combinations will appear: I saw them off but not I noticed them off;
There's trouble ahead and There's trouble afoot; dressed chicken but not undressed chicken. A
seed catalog describes a marigold as exceedingly double, though one might not have expected
a quantifier before a number word. The observed co-occurrences thus have to be taken as
raw data for classification and comparison; they cannot be adequately derived from some
nonlinguistic source such as 'the desired combinations of meanings'.
4 It can be readily seen that the statement 'there is a stateable set of B-co-occurrents for
each Ai in the construction A B' is equivalent to 'the construction A B is satisfied (i.e.
instances of it actually occur) for a stateable set of Ai Bj pairs'. For our present purposes, it
will be sufficient to describe a construction thus: a construction is a sentence, or a class
sequence such that some construction is defined as a combination of that class sequence
plus other class sequences. Thus TAN V is a sentence construction; TAN (a member of
the set of N-phrase constructions) and V (a member of the set of V-phrase constructions)
are each constructions, since N-phrase plus V-phrase defines a sentence. For all except
certain transformational sentences we can replace the words above by these: A construction
is a sentence, or an immediate constituent of a construction.
S An example of indirect use of these considerations. Since the classes A and N in English
contain in general different morphemes and words, the A-co-occurrence of N1 in A N1 and
the N-co-occurrence of N1 in Ni ofN will be different sets. But many A words contain N
morphemes (having been formed by N + na: wooden, glassy); and for these N na N1 constructions (a subset of A N1) we find that the N-co-occurrents are partially similar to the
N-co-occurrents of Ni in Ni of N (wooden table, table 0/ wood, glassy sur/ace, surface of
glass, but only glassy stare). This suggests that the status of Nl relative to ( ) ofN is similar
to the status of Ni relative to N na ( ), and hence relative to A ( ), since N na is just a
subset of A. (Note that the difference of meaning between glassy surface and sur/ace 0/
glass is not relevant here.)
6 Same subscript means same member of the class: the second appearance ofNl indicates
the same morpheme as the first Nl.
7 This requirement excludes, among others, the cases of small classes whose members
have the same immediate neighbors but different co-occurrents elsewhere in the sentence,
e.g. and, or.
S Examples of all these will be given in a later paper, describing how transformations are
actually set up for a language.

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMATION

205

9 These are examples of two major types of environmental effect. In the first, the absent
combinations (e.g. book whom) do not occur in ordinary use of the language. In the second,
the absent combinations (e.g. The letter was returned # They must have been misaddressed)
can be found, but usually with different textual environment, often with different intonation, and in any case not as the statistically checked experimental result of asking the informant to substitute The letter for The letters.
10 Further analyses will become possible in § 2.2 when we add the consideration of
individual co-occurrence; while the further step of setting up transformations (§§ 3.0ff.)
is based on the added consideration of identical co-occurrences (§ 1.3).
11 Two constructions of the same n classes may also be distinguished by their n-tuples, as
two morphemes of the same phonemes are distinguished here. For example, if P N (at this
time etc.) occurs in various sentence positions, we merely consider it the same construction
but in different positions. If, however, the particular pairs of P and N are partly different
in different positions (say at sentence beginning and medially), we define two separate P N
constructions.
12 There are many special cases, homonymities, etc. which must be left for a later discussion.
13 There is a minor special case of Nl P N2 in which the two N have both parallel and
P N = A characteristics, e.g. in crushed against the wall of the building or heard the paddle of
the canoe. Internally the N P N is of the P N = A type. But in relation to the preceding
Y, each N occurs in similar sentence environments as object N of that Y. That is, Nl and
Nz occur in same sentence environments after this Y, even though they do not otherwise,
and in respect to this they are parallel.
14 The P N = A type of Nl Pa N2 also often occurs in reverse order, N2 P4 Nl, but with
different sentence environment, usually different P, and with a change of headship: The
name of the lists is 'Soldiers killed in battle'. Since the environment is not held constant,
there is little interest in this unless some particular relations can be stated, e.g. between the
P3 and P4 choices.
15 Where X (or Y) in the given environment participates in a discontinuous morpheme
extending to another construction, we find this participation on both X and Y of X C Y:
He reads, He reads and writes. Certain C may be defined as participating in such an extending morpheme even where their X or Y alone would not: in Nj and Nj Y, the Y
generally shows the plural morpheme even when Nj Y or Nj Y alone does not (A man and
woman are here but A man is here).
16 By Noam Chomsky.
17 This zero morpheme meets the requirements for a zero - of being determined by observable conditions (namely I, you, and plurals as subject); and it satisfies the meaning of
Y + zero, which is not just V in general but Y in the present tense. The -s 'third person
singular' can now be considered an alternant of this zero, occurring with the remaining
subjects.
18 For convenience, we will henceforth consider the oed and zero (and os) suffixes to be
members of the auxiliary class v; this requires us to view could, should, etc. as independent
members of v rather than as can, shall, etc. + oed. Alternatively we can regard the suffixes
as a separate class, and could as can + -ed, etc. But should, would often occur in environments where oed does not otherwise occur (e.g. I would, if he will too). Furthermore, we
would have to note that can etc. occur with oed (to make could) but not with -s (He can, but
He sees). Note in the whole analysis the departure of structural considerations from historical antecedents.
19 These are only combinations that constitute verb structures. To each of these can be
added be -en just before the Y, forming the passive of that construction; but this involves
also a certain rearrangement of the sentence environment (§ 4.11). A few other combinations occur, as in He has had stolen from him two invaluable manuscripts, which seems
to contain v + have -en + have -en + V. But the constituent analysis here is not he (subject
N) + has had stolen (Y) + P N + object N-phrase, for these cannot be rearranged like
other N, Y. P N, or replaced here by other N, V, P N. This sentence has to be analyzed

206

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

as a transformation; even without that the stolen would be taken with from him, not with
has had. Note the alternative form He has had two invaluable manuscripts stolen from him.
20 The N being subject of the V. If which follows N P N, either of the N may be the one
with similar co-occurrents: 1 was watching the wall of books which ( ).
21 In English the antecedent is almost always in a different sentence structure from the
pro-morpheme, though both sentence structures may be within the same sentence. (Sentence structure is used here to mean any sequence which is a transform of a sentence, such
as which had cracked in The wall which had cracked finally collapsed.) An exception is
pronoun + self, whose antecedent is almost always the subject: Carl saw himself. Carl
went by himself. Carl himself saw it. This can perhaps be analyzed as not a pronoun but
just a morpheme self (different from the self), with the subject having a discontinuous
repetition (in pronoun form) before this self. However, pronoun + 's (which is a member of
A) occurs freely in the same clause as its antecedent N: He took his books.
22 The total co-occurrence range of a free he equals the total co-occurrence ranges of all
bound he. A marginal case is such pronoun occurrences as unstressed you're, we're, one's
in ( ) only young once, which can perhaps be replaced by all members ofN, or perhaps only
by a new subclass ofN (people, Jim, etc.; whereas one can otherwise be substituted by any
N). In contrast, the it of It's raining is not a pro-morpheme at all: almost no other morpheme can substitute for it here, so that this it is just a member of N.
23 We also find some as a member of T (article class) in some person. Many words are
members of more than one class.
24 The s of ours, yours, etc. and the n of mine are also pro-N: I'll take my book and you take
yours.
25 The following analysis will show who to contain the morpheme wh- even though it lacks
the phonemic /hw/.
26 Vanous additional considerations show that these morphemes belong to the classes
missing in the sentence structure that follows them. For example, P occurs in general only
before N, but it also occurs before whom, which, what (to whom,from which, etc.). Throughout § 2.62 N indicates N-phrase: the wh- words replace a full N-phrase and do not have T
or A before them; and V will be used for V-phrase. Whenever S is written here directly
after wh- it is understood that some part of this S is occupied by the post-wh- morpheme,
e.g.... who went is wh- S, the -0 being the subject N; whom I saw is wh- S, the -om being the
object N.
27 We find that in place of who, whom, which, and a zero morpheme in place of whom, which,
when no P precedes these: a flower that had dropped, the place 1 mentioned. We regard that
or zero as variants of who, with the -0, -om, -ich appearing after it in a zero variant. In the
first S1 wh- S2 type below, that or a zero morpheme replaces the who, with the post-whmorpheme appearing in full in S2: I know who came, 1 know that he came. Justification for
these analyses becomes apparent when all the constructions are compared.
28 It is impossible to give here all the co-occurrence characteristics which justify these
analyses, but as an example note that in sentences like I found what you lost the two verbs
are always such as have some nouns (not merely pronouns) which are common to both
their object ranges. We would hardly find, for example, 1 bit what you extrapolated.
29 Among minor occurrences of wh- note these: wh- S constituting an independent subject
N-phrase, primarily in N is N sentences and passives (Who did it is a question, Who did it
can no longer be discovered); whoever S as independent N-phrase (Whoever did it was afool);
the construction What a clean job I; while as a C. Sentences like 1 know where may be
analyzed as 1 know where S with the S present in a zero pro-morpheme; the antecedent S
is usually present in the neighborhood.
30 After constructions like 1 am going, 1 have gone, the second part is but he isn't, but he
hasn't, not but he doesn't. The is and has operate like members of v. After I will be going
the second part is and so will you be or and so will you, with the be repeated like a member of
v or zeroed like a V. A similar situation occurs in N is N sentences: He's a fool but she
isn't, He'll be late but she won't be or but she won't. And the case is similar for V to V and V
Ving sequences: I'll try to catch it if you will or if you try.

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMATION

207

31 In He came, andfast, we satisfy the property of C of always occurring between identical
constructions, by saying that a zero pro-S of he came occurs beforefast. This is supported
by the fact that the D word in the position of fast will always be in the D-co-occurrence of
the verb of the preceding section (came).
32 There are many subtypes. For example, there is no The scare made the girl's scream.
Note the general similarities to the constructions of § 2.S.
33 Some first V have a P before the second V: insist on going, insist on you going, succeed
in taking, stop noticing, stop him from noticing, stop him noticing.
34 It will be noted later that for each such construction V Nl N2 the same morphemes
also occur in the construction V N2 P Nl: give a book to the fellow, ask a question of him.
But this is a transformational criterion, such as we are skirting here: the constructional
status here is to be determined only by grammar and co-occurrence ranges. Some additional
transformational properties characterize only this structure: the transformation of
replacing the second N by its pro-N generally involves interchange of the two N (give it to
the fellow) but not so for the first N (give him a book); there are two passive transformations, one of which shows the P N character of the first N (A book was given to the
fel/ow, The fellow was given a book).
35 Similarly in N vn N: They are honorary members. The shambles above does not conflict
since it is preceded by the singular a and is hence singular like its first N barn.
36 This construction is thus seen to have some similarities to the Nl VI (Ns Va) of § 2.7
(We heard it flow etc.), although the VI there is not in the Vb subclass. When transformations are considered, these two will be found to be special cases of the same transformation.
37 Furthermore, V has restricted co-occurrence relations to P (i.e. there are specific V P
pairs) in such forms as He took the project over, but V does not seem to have specific pairs
with the second N of V N N. A different analysis of this and of forms like threw the door
open is proposed by Noam Chomsky.
38 There may be small differences in meaning, and large differences in style; this does not
affect the fact (but only the interpretation) of the co-occurrence equivalences discussed
above or the transformational equivalences discussed below.
39 There is also a minor type of question-assertion sequence, as in Did you go to Rome, or
to Paris? Did you. or she, do it ? These have two like constituents joined by or, with a rising
intonation on the first and a falling intonation at sentence-end. (It is distinct from the
yes-no question Did you or she do it? with one rising intonation.) The assertion here is I
went to Rome or To Rome (and She or She did or She did it). The two or more constituents
joined by or function like the post-wh- morpheme of that status (to Rome, or to Paris functions like where; the pro-morpheme equals a disjunction of members of its class). That is,
the assertion always contains a constituent of that constructional status (e.g. To Rome, or
perhaps Neither,just to Marseilles) and repetitions, pro-morphemes, or zeros ofthe rest of
the question as above.
40 From this it follows, incidentally, that two matched sentences do not occur in identical
environments even if their introducers seem to be identical: they really appear in two
different positions in respect to their one discontinuous matching introducer: people are
cynical occurs in position ( h and people are not cynical occurs in position ( h of the environment Some ( h Some ( h.
41 Some of these C occur also with a different transformation, in which the subject N is
zeroed and the V has -ing instead of a tense or auxiliary v: The sailors got the raise while
(still) organizing for it. When the reconstructed secondary would be N is N, N is A, or N
is P N, this transformation may treat is as a V or may drop the is, when the subject N is
zeroed: Thf sailors got the raise while being on duty or while on duty. In this transformation
the secondary sentence (C + Sa) often appears first: While walking home. we found this
stone. In Walking home, we found this stone we can say there is a zero member of C. With
zero and certain other C, the zeroed subject N is followed by to V in the place of v V: To
get there we must rush; They rushed so as to get there on time.
42 Certain occurrences of and and or cannot be regarded as deriving in this way from two

208

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

sentences; e.g. Sugar and water make syrup (compare Sugar with water makes syrup), They
argued back and forth, a black and white drawing, She and I disagreed. It is generally
possible to characterize these cases. Certain specific combinations of specific morphemes +
and fall in this category, e.g. between Nand N (I lost it somewhere between Fifth and Sixth).
In the case of Nand N Veach other (Electrons and positrons repel each other) we do not
directly expand the Nand N because of the pro-N-pair each other.
43 The distinctions have to be drawn carefully. Coordinating conjunctions do not necessarily have reversible order: The goldfish ate too much and died.
44 He is richer than you is not He is rich + you are rich but He is rich + -er than + you are
rich. Cf. Edward Sapir, 'Grading: A Study in Semantics', Philosophy of Science 11 (1944),
93-116.
45 The first sentence may have an object, as in I phoned him to learn what was going on,
transformed from Nl VI N2 and Nl V2. Superficially this can be confused with the next
case below (Nl VI N2 and N2 V2) until the various co-occurrence ranges are checked, as
also the substitutability of C (I phoned him in order to .. .). When both Nl and N2 are in the
subject range for V2, the sentence is ambiguous, and both analyses (and both meanings)
are possible. (Such homonymities appear wherever a single resultant structure is obtained
from different transformations and underlying sentences.) Example: We saw him up there
from We saw 'him + We were up there or from We saw him + He was up there.
46 Another transformation for two sentences with the same object will be seen in § 3.8.
The shared words, like the zeros of the parallel sentences (§§ 3.3-5) and bound pro-morphemes in general, are not merely two independent occurrences of the same morpheme.
Rather, the morpheme in question extends into the shared, zero, or pro-morphemed
position in the next sentence. Hence the meaning of the underlying sentences is not merely
that I bought a house and that he built a house, but that the house that I bought and the
one that he built are the same.
47 This formulation overlooks the fact that certain sentences containing Ni may not cooccur with some particular Ni is ( ) sentences. The more exact statement therefore is: Any
sentence SI which contains an Ni-phrase (provided the Ni-phrase is a transform of an Ni
is [ 1sentence) can be analyzed as a shared-word combination of SI with Ni in place of the
Ni-phrase + the corresponding Ni is ( ) sentence.
48 Cf. the end of § 2.62.
49 But other V + P N do not have this transformation: there is no passive of The flowers
grew near the wall. Nor does the passive occur with N is N sentences: They became refugees,
We are at peace. In N is N sentences the long morphemes -s 'plural' etc. extend over both
N; the position of the second N can be occupied by any N-phrase, P N-phrase, or A-phrase
(including Ving, or Yen from the passive); and a certain subclass of V including become,
remain, etc. occurs in the position of is.
50 The V P mentioned above operates like the first X position. All these examples have
shown the passive of a primary SI which includes a secondary S2 in one of its N positions.
The secondary S2 could be transformed into a passive without affecting the primary: Many
thousands watched the daredevils race the cars, Many thousands watched the cars being
raced by the daredevils. Or both primary and secondary can be transformed: The cars
being raced by the daredevils were watched by many thousands. In the shared-word sequence
(§ 3.6), the primary sentence can be transformed, but the secondary only if the result fits
with the restrictions on word-sharing. In contrast, there is no passive of V to V constructions because these do not constitute a single sentence structure composed out of SI and S2
but two parallel structures (§ 3.5): I phoned to meet him.
51 The by which is a member of P has restrictions of co-occurrence; that is, it occurs
between certain Vi and Nj and not between others. The by of the passive occurs between
any Vi and Nj which satisfy Nj Vi.
52 Among the many details omitted here are the characterizations of such exceptions
which do not transform as It caught fire. There is a partial transformation with -aNe in the
position of -en: The milk is drinkable by the children. But there are various restrictions on
the occurrence of this -able, so that it can only be considered a quasi-transformation (§ 4.5).

CO-OCCURRENCE AND TRANSFORMA [ION

209

Note that there is a semantic addition in -able such as we do not have in the -en passive.
53 There are many other introducers, with the constructional status of D, P N, or N V
that, which occur with almost any sentence: perhaps, certainly, in general, It is probable
that, etc. We could propose transformations, for example: S-It is probable that S; or
N v V D- How D N v V! (How quickly he came!). Since there may be some S with which
these do not occur, we have to consider them quasi-transformations (§ 4.5); note that they
contribute more specific semantic additions than do the transformations.
54 Certain dependent order changes may be mentioned here, though they can be regarded
as part of the sentence-elements with which they occur. Most of these are limited to S2
position (after particular combining elements). The order change N v~v N is usual with
the question intonation, and always with the element wh-?; the inversion of tenses with
not can be expressed by assuming flot to occur before v and adding not v-..v not; and the
bringing of the pro-morphemed section to the beginning of the sentence occurs always
after wh-.
55 Here and in the other transformations it is only the v proper (auxiliary or tense) that
is dropped. The expansions of v (be -ing, have -en) remain, and the -ing is added to the first
of them (except that the sequence being Ving is avoided): He has read ~ His having read,
He has been reading ~ His having been reading.
56 After -s the parenthesized o/always occurs. More restrictedly, as a quasi-transformation, we have Nz-Ving in the position of Ving (of) N2: your play-readings. Another quasitransformation is Ntis a Vero/Nz, N1 is a N2-Ver, and (dropping the N1) N2-Ver: He is a
play-reader, etc.
57 In a quoted-sentence object of Nl said to Nz, I is a pronoun of N1, you is a pronoun of
N2. The position of the quote marker can be occupied by that (or zero), in which case the
special pronoun relations above do not hold, and certain changes occur in the v.
58 The case where the set of n-tuples that satisfy one construction is included in the set of
n-tuples that satisfy another construction (rather than being identical with that other set)
is a one-directional transformation (e.g. § 4.11), but does not have to be regarded as a
quasi-transformation.
59 In general, a given structure may be subject to several transformations, e.g. N v V N,
or the object N (or any N) position in a primary sentence. And a given transformation may
occur in more than one structure, e.g. zero recurrence, or N v inversion. It may be possible
to characterize for a given language what types of transformations occur in what types of
structures.
60 If two transformations occur in complementary products, so that they do not both
occur in the same position, we can call them positional variants of each other, and say that
they are the same transformation (but with the observed different values in the different
positions).
61 The set of all sentences is closed with respect to transformations. If homonymous
sentences can be suitably distinguished or marked, the set of all transformations (all the
occurring products of the elementary transformations) yields a partition of the set of sentences. The set of transformations is thus a quotient set of the set of sentences. If we now
map the set of sentences into the set of transformations (so that each sentence is associated
with the particular product of transformations that is present in it), then those sentences
which are carried into the identity transformation are the kernel of the set of sentences
with respect to this mapping. These kernel sentences are precisely the underlying elementary sentences mentioned above.
82 But V! is an N v V kernel sentence with zero variant of you, plus exclamatory intonation. Note that only sequential sentences, or sentences with internal evidence of zeros (as
in the case of V!), are built up to full sentence structure. The traditional Fire! is left as it
stands; we cannot know with what words to fill it out.
83 Most cases of Ving will occur under V (either from is -ing, as an expansion of v, in V,
or else from various transforms of V). But some cases are members of A; these appear in
co-occurrences which are not the same as those of the corresponding V. Example: unyielding, and understanding in He has a very understanding manner.

210

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

64 The sentences of a kernel are therefore maximally independent of each other; one can
say that they give the least possible information about each other. (In contrast, transforms
obviously contain information about each other, as do sequential sentences.) Nevertheless,
some kinds of dependences between sentences cannot be removed by the methods mentioned here, and remain in the kernel. Such are for example dependences among loose and
un specifiable subclasses, e.g. the partitive adjectives of a particular noun: the occurrence
of one of them in a kernel sentence tells us that a partly similar sentence with another
partitive adjective of that noun also exists in the kernel.
65 Both types of problems are discussed in detail and provided with a theoretical framework in Noam Chomsky's dissertation, Transformational Analysis.
66 Such added flexibilities are often attained when a transformation gives the sentence
the form of a different structure which has that flexibility, in this case the similarity between
the passive and an N V P N sentence with omittable P N.
67 This has been shown by Noam Chomsky, in the reference given in note l.
68 There are also possible applications in translation, for many languages are more similar
in their kernel sentences than in their total structure (the transformations, and especially
the details of the transformations, being more different). Translational equivalences can be
established for the kernel combinations of words, and if necessary even for the elementary
transformations as such. There is also some reason to think that the kernels may function
differently in memory and thought from the transformations.

9

THE ELEMENTARY TRANSFORMATIONS

INTRODUCTION

In transformational theory, the first result is that there is an equivalence
relation among certain subsets of sentences in respect to their word choices.
The second result is that the transformations, in each language, are not just
an otherwise uncharacterized set of changes from one sentence structure to
another. A small number of constants appear in many transformations, and
only a few types of structures are seen in the resultants. If, therefore, we
consider a transformation as possibly an operation on word-selections, or on
the elementary sentence structures that are satisfied by these characteristic
word-selections, we may seek to divide such operations into a small set of
elementary operations.
The search for elementary operations is supported by the fact that there
are many cases of apparently unrelated transformations containing in part
the same constants: e.g. -ing in
He is reading it.
He began reading it.
His reading of it was denied.
I saw him reading it.
The reading of it was by him.
Every student reading it will get credit.
In a morphological analysis of language this would constitute no problem,
since we would merely say that -;ng is added to V in various circumstances.
However, it is clear that -;ng and other affixes are not merely morphological
operations, since they appear only in conjunction with particular other
changes in other words of the sentence. Each appearance of -ing on V is
therefore part of a coordinated occurrence of a number of changes in
specifiable parts of the sentence; i.e. it is only part of a larger (transformational) change over the whole sentence. l But if we have a fair number of
transformations each of which contains -;ng as part of it, we would then
Excerpts from Transformations and Discourse Analysis Papers 54 (1964).

211

212

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

have a number of unrelated whole-sentence changes each of which includes
the adding of -ing to V. This is not reasonable. We would like to show that
all addings of -ing have one source. But we have seen that each transformation is made up not of separately existing changes in various parts of the
sentence, but of a single transformational change over a whole sentence; and
if a transformation CP1 is decomposable at all into components, then each
component is itself a transformation over the whole sentence, and CP1 is
simply a succession (product) of the component transformations. Therefore,
if we want one source for the addings of -ing, we have to find one elementary
transformation, which adds -ing to V as part of a change over the whole
sentence; this elementary transformation is then included as a stage, i.e. a
component transformation, in obtaining every transform that contains -ing.
We now present a set of elementary transformations cP which operate on
the elementary sentence structures K, yielding cP K, and which also operate
on cP K, in such a way that every cP cP ..• cP K is a possible sentence structure
(given that the constants required by the cP find the environment which
permit their occurrence), and that every actual sentence is a satisfaction of
one of the cp cp ••. cp K. It should be remarked at the outset that a list of
elementary transformations, adequate for the above purpose, can be stated
in several different but of course closely related ways. The main result is not
that there exist these particular operations rather than others, but that it is
possible to find one or another set of a few elementary operations such that
between any two sentence-sets which are transforms of each other there
exists a succession of sentence-sets, each obtainable from (i.e. different from)
the preceding one by one of these elementary transformations, with each
intermediate set containing sentences of the language (or forms which are
constructed like sentences except that the particular n-tuple involved
refuses to admit the constants required by that elementary transformation).
It will be further seen that the elementary transformations are not merely
such as suffice for the above purpose, but also have a very reasonable
character. They consist of: (1) three types of increments, i.e. structures added
to K: insertions among the K-positions, operators on K, and connectives
between two K; (2) a morphophonemic zeroing of recoverable redundant
words 2 ; (3) extensions of the above operations to new subclasses of their
operands; (4) certain elementary permutations. This simple character of the
elementary transformations makes it preferable to provide for aberrant
sentence-sets as special K-types rather than as special transformational types.
O. SENTENCES OF THE KERNEL (K)

We begin with certain categories of words which can be defined morpholo-

THE ELEMENTAR Y TRANSFORMA TIONS

213

gically by what affixes they take, or alternatively in a circular manner by the
major transformations which can operate on all the words of a particular
category:
noun (man, book)
verb (exist, take, rely)
preposition (in, of)
adjective (large, clear)
D: primitive adverb (here, now, very, almost)
t: two tense morphemes: -s (and zero, 0) 'present', oed 'past'.

N:
V:
P:
A:

Each elementary sentence K is a particular ordered n-tuple of words (with
the assertion intonation or punctuation) satisfying one of the following
structures, i.e. sequences of categories.
I

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
It
There

V

t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t

Vo
Vn
Vp
Vnp
Vnn

01

O2

be
be
be
be

N
PN
N
PN
N
N
N
PN
A
De

ViI
Vtb

N

A man came.
The man found gold.
The man relied on gold.
The man attributed the letter to Shaw.
The man gave Shaw a letter.
A whale is a mammal.
The book is on the desk.
The box is small.
The box is here.
It rained. It's May 8.
There's hope.

The symbols I (subject), I, V, 0 (object), will be used to indicate the Ksegments which are listed beneath them. 3 The subscripted V indicate
particular subcategories of V which occur with the particular values of o.
Some members of these subcategories are two-word sequences V Dp (Dp:
certain prepositional adverbs): look up (as in look the number up vs. look up
the street); these could also be analyzed as ordinary V with a restricted Dp
adverb foIlowing, but some of the positions of Dp are different from those of
D. Where the particular t is irrelevant, the t will be omitted from formulas,
and t be will be written is.
The v",. is a smaIl subcategory of dative verbs. Its sentences could be
obtained from the Vnp structure, at the cost of a special transformation. The
De is a smaIl subcategory oflocational adverbs. The ViI is a smaIl subcategory
of V, including be, followed by certain time-subcategories of Nand A. The
structure differs from those above it in that E contains only the one word it,

214

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

which does not take inserts or plural (as N does) though it accepts other
operations that N accepts. The last K structure differs from the others in
that there is not a member of N, and takes almost no transformations of N;
and the morphophonemic plural of be (which is a member of the small
V,h subclass) depends on the N in the il column, whereas it otherwise depends
on the I column.
One or two additional K-structures may be needed for small subcategories
of V, e.g. Nt Ve Ne, where the il = Ne contains collective or plural Ne (including Nand N, etc.): They collected a crowd.
The words in the K consist for the most part of single morphemes (e.g.
house, not establishment). A word in K which contains more than one
morpheme is not divisible transformationally; that is, the sentence containing the complex word cannot be transformationally related to a sentence
containing that word minus some of its morphemes: e.g. nation.
It is clear from the above that a slightly different set of K structures could
be proposed instead of the list given here. Each difference would have to be
compensated for by some corresponding alteration in the transformations
which operate on the K. The over-all differences would be small, and the
character of the theory would not be affected.
It is also clear that all the K structures fit into a single family of partially
similar category-sequences. They are all cases of a single sequence I t V il,
where each of these symbols is a disjunction of a few interrelated categories
with restrictions as to which value of one symbol can occur with which value
of another: I is N, or rarely it or there; V is a disjunction of the subcategories
of V; il is il, or the sequence ill il 2 ; Q 1 is N, P N, A, De; Q 2 is P N or N.
1. INSERTION

Each category, whether in the K structures or in the increment structures
below, may have certain morphemes before or after it in the K or increment,
without affecting its position in the structure, i.e. its occurrence as a value of
I, t, V, Ql' il 2 , or of a particular segment of an increment. E.g. there may be
appended:
next to N: a, some and other quantifiers on the left (ql); certain D and P N
(and some P A), like only, in particular, on the right (q,): He in
particular should go.

next to V: morphologically elementary adverbs quite, just and Db
(merely, simply) which are morphologically derived but not
syntactically derived, i.e. are not transforms of their morphological source: He merely slept, ~ His sleeping was mere.
Here also not and emphatic stress, placed between t and V.

THE ELEMENT AR Y TRANSFORMA TrONS

215

next to A: morphologically elementary adverbs quite, very: and certain
suffixes, e.g. -ish (The box is small, The box is smallish). To the
comparative adjectives A e , chiefly, less, more, there may be
appended certain adverbs of comparative degree: far, little: His
seriousness is little less than yours.
left of t:
The almost closed set can, may, will, etc. can be viewed as
inserted before t, or else as included in the category t.
right of X: To the right of various categories or segments X of K or increment, certain primitive C X may be inserted: back andforth,
more or less.
within K: placed before or after any word of K (less comfortably before N
in .0): adverbial asides such as however, moreover, in general, in
particular. These are called sentence adjuncts.
As insertions we also count the large sets of locally inserted adverbs D, P N
which can appear also as predicates is A, is P N on the whole K:

Dm: adverbs and P Nm of manner, appended to V (except be, in general) and
to A: He sang the songs slowly; also in the form Am in His singing of the
songs was slow. Particular members of Dm occur naturally with particular members of V, A, much like the word-selection differences
within K. No other increments, neither the other D nor any other
increments, have restrictions of an intra-K character on co-occurrence.
This would make it desirable to consider the Dm as part of the K, or as
part of a second K with connective, e.g. He sang the songs and The
singing was slow. However, any convenient formulation of this type can
be shown to be transformationally equivalent to setting up He sang the
songs and His singing of the songs was slow, so that we end up with
Dm being appended to the K as a whole.
D,: adverbs and P N g of degree, appended to A: He is only moderately
successful; also (though less naturally) in the form A, in His success is
only moderate.
De: adverbs of comparison appended to A when the comparative conjunction follows: They are less clear than I expected; also in the form
Ae in Their clarity is less than I expected (see 3.2). The most characteristic De are: before than: -er (Ae form: more), less; before as: as (Ae
form: as much); beforefor--to: enough, too (Ae: too much); before that:
so (Ae: such).
Dr: adverbs and P N, of time, appended to K: He sings these songs frequently; also His singing these songs is frequent (occurs frequently).
These categories of D and P N can be considered as being primitively in-

216

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

serts, which are transformable into sentence-operators (2.3) is A, is P N (and
occurs Dt , occurs P Nt). Alternatively, they can be considered as being
primitively sentence-operators, which are transformable into D, P N. The
considerations for this will be discussed below.· In any case, a number of
alternative formulations are possible for D (and P N) in general and for Dm
in particular.
Some of the individual inserts proposed here are similar to larger classes of
increments, e.g. to D or C K in general. However, they are unique in form
or position and would require special transformations to derive them from
the larger classes of increment. We therefore take them as primitive inserts,
and indeed may use these as models for some transformational extensions of
occurrence of the larger classes. This is much the same as the choice in the
case of the special K-structures which can more easily be taken as primitive
than be derived from the major K-structures.
2. OPERATORS ON VERB AND SENTENCE

There are certain increments on K which occupy some of the r, V, Q
positions of the sentence that results from their operation, hence are not
merely inserts: e g. I deny operates on He came, yielding I deny that he came,
where r=l, V=deny, Q=that he came. Each of these increments consists of
a new word which is morphologically a member of V (know, expect, is, etc.),
plus certain words or morphemes affixed to the K which is receiving the
increment or to the V of that K: know that K, expect N's Ving of Q (where
N V Q is the K), is Ving (where V is the V of the K). In addition, the new V
of type 2.3 have their own r or Q (but not both, so that they do not constitute a whole K). It will be seen that these increments can be considered as
operators on K. The subtypes are:
Operators Y on verb (2.1), e.g.
He studies eclipses-l-He is studying eclipses.
Operators U on V Q (2.2), e.g.
He studies eclipses-l-He is a student of eclipses.
He studies eclipses-l- He makes studies of eclipses.
Operators W on whole K (2.3), e.g.
He studies eclipses-l-We know that he studies eclipses.
He studies eclipses-l-His studying eclipses surprised us.
He studies eclipses-l-That he studies eclipses is clear.
2.1. Operators Yon Verbs

There are two operators be--ing, have--en, on V which send

THE ELEMENTARY TRANSFORMATIONS

217

N t V n --+ N t be Ving n,
Nt V n--+ Nt have Yen n.
The Von which these Y operate includes all other V, including the V in the
U and Woperators noted below; Y do not operate on Y, except that have--en
operates on be--ing: He has been studying eclipses, but ~ He has had studied
eclipses, ~ He is being studying eclipses, ~ He is having studied eclipses. Also
be--ing does not normally operate on be and on certain V such as know: ~
I am knowing this. 4
2.2. Operators U on V D

A far more complex set of operators U contains subtypes graduated from
similarity to Y over to similarity to W. They all have the form:
Nt V n --+ N t U Vm P n,
where P D stands for P (usually, of) plus D if D begins with N, and for D
alone otherwise (i.e. P=zero if D does not begin with N). The Vm here stands
for Vn, Ving, to V; and when U =be or certain related verbs, also Va. In
some subtypes of U there is a transformation (4.24) which repeats the E,
yielding a W-like form as though both the U and also the K on which it
operates each had a E:
N j t U Vn P n --+ N j t U Nj's Vn P n
He takes a walk daily--+He takes his walk daily.
This repetition of N; does not occur for certain U, e.g. be, but occurs with the
other U.
The various subtypes of U operate on V, U and W within the restrictions
specified for that subtype; but they do not operate on Y: ~ He began having
studied eclipses.
The main subtypes are given in 'Transformational Theory', § 3.2.
2.3. Operators W on K
This set of operators consists of two main types: Ws in which the K is after
in which the K is
the operator, and appears as D of the operator; and
before the operator and appears as its E. w's consists of N Vs before the K;
and
consists of
D, is As, is Ns after the K. Depending on the subtype
of
As, Ns the K itself is deformed ('nominalized'):
by inserting that, whether, before K: that he bought books;
or by N (t) V D--+for N to V D: for him to buy books;
or by changing (t) V--+ Ving or Vn; and subject N--+N's, by N, or of N;
and (1) D--+P D (usually of D), or (2) leaving D unchanged even if it begins

w..

w..

v.,

v..

218

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

with N: (1) Hispurchase of books, (2) his buying books, the buying of books
by him, the singing ofbirds. 6
The various subtypes yield the following, operating on He wrote the letter:

Wh:
Ww:
W,:

~ I know that he wrote the letter. 7
~I

wonder whether he wrote the letter, I wonder what he wrote.

~ I prefer (for) him to write the letter.

WI operates only on K (t=should). Some of its members are also in a
subset of Wh which requires that the K on which it operates have t=should:
I prefer that he (should) write the letter.

The deformation of K (including K with increment) by adding that,
whether,for will be marked Kn°.

W,:

~I awaited his writing of the letter.

WI's:

~ She responded to his writing the letter.

The deformation of K (with possible increment, except be--ing), into N's
Ving a will be marked Kn'; the WI'S have P Kn' as Q.

W.. :
WI''':

imitated his signing of the letter. This inhibits the
formation of colonies by the bacteria.
~ This differs from his signing of the letter.
~They

The deformation of K (including of K with increment, except Y) into
N's Vn ofD (n including -ing) will be marked Kn; the WI''' have P Kn as D.
Kn may have, instead of N's, also by N or, if V= Vo , also of N: They imitated
the signing of the letter by the clerk, They imitated the singing of birds.
The Kn deformation of N is A, N is N is:
N is A~N's An, and as above An of N: He stressed its clarity.
N is N ~ N' s Nn: They sought his friendship.

Kn (and in respect to the ~, also Kn') is similar to N with inserts on it, in
respect to many further operations.

(comprising Vh , ;s A h , is Nh) with deformation of K into that K:
~ That he wrote the letter surprised me.
.... That he wrote the letter is clear.
~ That he wrote the letter is a fact.
Ww . (comprising Vw ., is Aw, is Nw) with deformation of K into whether K:
~ Whether he wrote the letter worried them, What he wrote worried
them.
~ Whether he wrote the letter is unclear, What he wrote is unclear.
Who

THE ELEMENTAR Y TRANSFORMA TIONS

219

~ Whether he wrote the letter is a

question, What he wrote is a
question.
Wi. (comprising Vi.' is N i ; and is Ai with possibly of N,for N after it),
with deformation of K into for N to va, and also into that N should

va:

~ For him to write letters angered them, That he should write letters

angered them.
~ For him to write letters is queer, That he should write letters is queer.

~ For him to write letters is the plan, That he should write letters is

the plan.
~ For him to write letters is nice (of him), That he should write

letters is nice.
~ For him to write letters is important (for him), That he should
write letters is important.
Wg. (Vg.• is Ag. is Ng), where the deformation of K is Kn':
~ His writing the letter angered them.
~ His writing the letter is surprising.
~ His writing the letter is a fact.
w". (Vn.' is An. is Nn), with deformation of K into Kn:
~ His writing of the letter simulates earlier styles.
~ His writing of the letter is intelligent.
~ His writing of the letter is a piece of high style.
We can look upon these Was operators on K, or as verbs which make a K
into their subject or object. In addition, there are verbs which make their
object an ordered pair (N. K), or else (N;. Kwith N; as}; and with t=should):

w"t:
Wnw:
Wnv:

I told him (that) it was late, I said to him that she had come.
I asked (of) him whether she had come.
He commanded them to lead+-(*) He commanded them that
they should lead.

These can be considered operators on the N. K pairs indicated. 8 The K
on which the W operate can take all increments, except that one of the Y
cannot occur on a K which is deformed into Kn', and no Yon a K which is
deformed into Kn. The K on which the W operate can also take almost all
other transformations. Therefore the operand of W may be written Sn
instead of Kn (i.e. nominalized arbitrary sentence).
In addition to the W, there are secondary (derived) sentence-operators,
namely the adjuncts D. P N, and the subordinate conjunctions C., which
appear not only in their original forms as inserts at the V, or as conjunctions,
but also in a sentence-operator form: D m , etc., in the list of Section I: He

220

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

sang quietly. His singing was quiet; Cs in He sang the anthem because they
insisted. His singing the anthem was because they insisted. The deformation of
the K (with whatever increments), when it becomes the subject, is Kn' and
Kn for some of these secondary operators, Kn alone for the others:

Nt V a D t -+ N's Ving a t be ~
He wrote this letter recentIy-+His writing this letter was recent.
Similarly KPN,-+Kn' is PNt (He wrote the letter on Monday. His writing the
letter was on Monday), and K Cs K-+Kn' is Cs K (He wrote the letter before
he knew, His writing the letter was before he knew). In all of these cases a
certain subcategory of V (occur, take place, etc.) can appear in the place of be.
Note that the t which is lost from Kn' appears in the sentence-operator verb:
He wrote ... ; His writing was.... For the adverbs of manner, we have
similarly:
Nt V a Dm-+N's Ving ofa t be Am
He sang quietly-+His singing was quiet.
and similarly for PNm , and for the adverbs of degree:
Nt be Dg A-+N's An t beAg
He was moderately angry-+His anger was moderate.
and similarly for Dc, the comparative adverbs.
The operator form of these D. PN, and Cs is less comfortable than their
adverb and conjunction form, and is morphologically more complex,
(requiring be and the deformations of the K; though the D is complex in that
it adds -ly to the A). However, the combination of these operations with
other operations on the same K is more easily stated on the basis of the
sentence-operator form of these operations than on the basis of the adverb
and conjunction forms.
It will be seen later that the forms here called secondary sentence operators
can be derived from the insertion (D. PN) and conjunction (CsK) forms, and
that secondary insertion-forms can be derived from the W (That he wrote it is
clear-+Clearly, he wrote it,' For him to write the letter was important for him-+
He wrote the letter, importantly for him). Also most W which take KnO
deformations on their K can secondarily take Kn' (or P Sn') deformations:
I know that he bought the books -+ I know of his buying the
books;
and W which take Kn' can also take Kn:
His buying the books occurred Tuesday-+ His buying of the
books occurred Tuesday.

THE ELEMENTAR Y TRANSFORMA TIONS

221

3. CONNECTIVES
There is also an operation on two sentences, which inserts a connective C
before the second sentence (which begins after the primary sentence). It can
be looked upon as a binary transformation: C (Sl' SZ)=Sl C Sz; for some
connectives, the C Sz is inserted at an appropriate interior point of Sl. Or it
can be seen as a succession of two unary operations: C operating as a stringhead on Sz to yield C S2 (which is not in general a sentence and can be
considered a non-nominal deformation of Sz), followed by C Sz operating
as a right or interior insert to Sl. 9
3.1. C.: The large set of subordinate conjunctions if, because, while, when,
after, -ing, so that, rather than, etc. occur in Sl C. Sz, and take the transformation-+S1n' is C. Sz: He waited because he hoped they would come; He
waited, hoping they would come.
3.2. Ceo. The comparative conjunctions than, as (andfor--to, that) have
some of the properties of C., but are restricted to occur after a primary
1: is De Ai sentence (with appropriate De which in some cases follows the
Ai); in the sentence-operator form this becomes
Ain of L1 is Ac than (or: as) Ain of LZ
Ain OfL1 is Ac for--to (or: that) S:
The play is less clear than the novel +-+ The clarity of the play
is less than the clarity of the novel.
The play is sufficiently innocuous for the censors to pass it. +-+
The innocuousness of the play is sufficient for the censors to pass
it.
The Ceo are like Ce in the zeroings they permit (4.2). For De, see 1 above.
3.3. Cc • The coordinate conjunctions and (including comma intonation),
or, but; these occur in Sl Cc Sz but do not take the sentence-operator transformation which we saw in CsK-+is C.K (i.e. ~ His coming is or her going,
etc.). The three Ce are distinguished in that and requires no difference
between Sl and S 2, or requires at least one difference, but requires at least
two differences (or one, in the case of paired predicates):
He went and he went.
He will come or she will come.
He will go but she will not go.
(~ He will go but she will go, but 3 He will go; but he will return).

3.4. who The morpheme wh connects, to a primary Sl which contains some
N;. a second sentence Sz which contains (or, after permutations, begins

222

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

with) the same N j • (In the case of adverbial PN of time, and place, manner,
etc. S2 begins with PNj .)
I know the man. wh The man came. = I know the man who
came.
I know this place. wh In this place he lived. = I know the place
where he lived.
The N j (or PNj ) of S2 is then pronouned into the second part of the wh-word;
and wh S2 is then inserted directly after the Nj in St. If S1 = X Nj Y, and if
we write X for the pronoun of X, and SOX for S with the X part of it omitted,
then we have:
8 1 wh 8 2 = X Ni (,) wh Ni 8 2 -Ni (,) Y.
The man left. wh The man was here.
= The man (,) who was here (,) left.
The (,) indicates that wh S 2 may be separated off by commas from S1' or not.
When wh S 2 is not separated off by commas, the meaning of the wh is
somewhat different and N j is not (in general) a proper noun; and under
certain conditions (depending on the t and the differences between the S)
this wh S2 takes a transformation related to the subordinating conjunctions
(in particular, if, provided that, and the like):

where Cs is any of several Cs related to if, according to the word choices in
SI' S2:

People who are jobless are bitter.
People are bitter if they are jobless.

Like Ce , so also wh does not have a sentence-operator form.

4. ANALOGIC EXTENSIONS
In addition to the incremental and redundancy-removing operations (note 2),
each defined on some class or subcategory of operands, there are certain
analogic extensions which apply one or another operation to some further
subclass of operands related to but outside that for which the operation had
been defined. These extensions work in only a small number of specifiable
ways. In the main, given two transformation ally related sentence sets,
Sa(X') and qJ Sa(X'), which contain subclass (usually a word-subcategory)
X' of X, and given a case SAX"), of the same sentence structure containing
a different subclass X" of X, the analogic extension yields qJ SaeX").

223

THE ELEMENT AR Y TRANSFORMA TIONS

In 4.1-6, we give examples of the specific kinds of extensions. Many
transforms, such as the passive, can be reached as end-points of not one
such extension but a succession of them. It will be seen that these extensions
do not open the way to arbitrary forming of sentences. They all lead to only
a certain range of sentence structures: only structures which are identical
with the resultants of the incremental and redundancy operations above,
except for permitting additional subclasses in stated positions within the
resultants. And even of these structures, most of the analogic operations (all
except that of 4.6) produce only such sentences as can be obtained from the
previously existing sentences by extending to a new subclass a previously
existing difference (in most cases transformational) among sentences of some
other subclass.
7. SUCCESSIVE APPLICATION OF THE OPERATION
Each transformation <Pi has been defined here as operating on an operand of
a certain form; a K or K-pair structure, which the <Pi may require to have
certain limitations as to subcategories of words in stated K-parts, or as to
identity of certain words in the two K. Now each transformation <P j produces
specified changes in the form; and for certain transformations, <Pi operates
on the resultant of <Pj in the same way that <Pi operates on a K. This can be
expressed by broadening the definition of the operand of <Pi to include the
additions, subcategory-changes, etc. that <P j has introduced.
7.1. The Trace of a Transformation

For this purpose, it is useful to specify the changes introduced by each <po
We define the trace of <Pi as the difference (in V, pre-tV, and post-tV
parts) in the resultant of <Pi as against the operand of <pj.
<P
J:
W:

TRACE

J before or after stated parts of K.

V. for V, with mostly human N for ~ (i.e. the pre-t V part), Sii
for Q (i.e. the post-tV part); or else Sn for ~, and
(incl.
is As, is Ns) for va.
U for V, Vm (of) a (with possibly N's repeating the N of ~).
U:
Y for V, Ving/en Q for Q.
Y:
CcS as J, after K; CeoS as J, after ~ is Ac.
Ce, Cco:
with zeroing: CcX as J, after X; CeoS as J, after X containing Dc.
CsS as Jon K.
C.:
wh:
wh Nj S-N; as J, on N;.
zeroing:
Vn Q, Vn instead of Sn', Sn as a of W; zero instead of N as a
of certain V; etc.

v..a

224

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

The traces of the various analogic extensions and inverses consist in that a
particular subcategory (or category or sequence) in a stated part of K is
different from the subcategory for that part in the definition of K, or of the qJ
on that K.
It can be shown that the trace of a transformation is never entirely zeroed
(or, rather that this is a safe assumption to make), even though parts of the
trace may be zeroed.
We can now say that if qJj operates on a resultant qJjK, then qJj operates on
qJ jK precisely as qJj operates on the parts of K, except that if any part X j of the
K has been replaced by a trace of qJj' the qJj operates on that trace of qJj in
X j as it would operate on the Xj' It is then possible to say for each qJj whether
it will or will not operate on a given qJj: for particular i,j, either qJj (qJjK)
occurs or it does not occur.
To sum up: Because the resultant of an operation CPj on K is K-like, it is
possible for an operation cPj defined on K to operate on the resultant of cpJ
on K. In general, cPj can operate on K if the K has the particular conditions
required in the definition of qJj. And cpj can operate on qJj if qJ j introduces the
conditions for CPj, or if K had the conditions for qJl> and qJj did not destroy
them, or, finally, if the definition of qJj is extended so as to accept in a stated
K position the new material brought into it by qJ j' It is therefore possible to
draw up a table showing which operations can be carried out on the resultants
of which operations. Each operation qJj produces a particular kind of K-like
structure, so that if an operation is able to act on the resultant of cP j it can do
so no matter whether cPj in turn had been applied to a K or to the resultant
of some qJ acting on a K, and so on.

7.2. Independent Transformations on K
In principle we do not need the additional concept of two transformations
operating separately on a K. However, for many classes of qJ, cPj qJj K= CPt qJJ
K; and furthermore both these resultants are identical with what we would
get if we could combine separately the effect of qJj on K and the effect of qJ j
on the same K. This happens when the traces of CPI and CPj do not alter the
operand of the other, as when one J is added to one part of a K and another
J to another part of the same K, or when a J is added to a part of a K while a
&entence-operator N V:. that is added to the whole K. Even when two J are
added to the same part X of the same K, their action is independent if each
operates only in respect to the X:

J I: X~JIX; J r: X~XJr
J I (J,x) = J r (JIX): X~JIX Jr'
If the two J on the same X are added to the same side of X, they are in-

THE ELEMENTARY TRANSFORMATIONS

225

dependent if the second J to be added operates without reference to the
earlier J, i.e. operates only in respect to the X. In this case the latter-added J
would be closer to the X than the earlier-added J:
Hence, if
J r : AX B~A XJ r B,
J r1 : A X B ~ A X lr1 B
Jr2 : AXlr1 B-+AXlr2 lr1 B
lr2 (Ir1x) = X lr2 lr1>
lr1 (Ir2X) = X lrl l r2 .

then
and
Thus
while

It should be noted that while J,1 follows J,2 to yield X J,1 J,2' and J,2
follows J,l to yield X J,2 J,I' both orderings of J,I' J,2 are possible in this
example, to yield one sentence or another.
Although we have defined no separate primitive activity of summing the
separate operation of two qJ on the same K, we can say that in the above
conditions the effect of qJj on qJ jK is the same as a summing of the independent effects of qJ j on K and qJl on K. The need to specify that qJj occurs on
qJ jK remains only for transformation pairs in which the operand K-parts
of one are altered by the trace of the other.
7.3. Transformations operating on Resultants
J, which are defined to operate on the K-parts, can also operate on the new
N V:. or
D (including is As, is N s), U, and Y, since these are simply new
subcategories of the categories occupying K positions. But J does not operate

v..

in general on the new I and D which are deformed from the underlying S or
V D on which W, U operate. Nor does J operate in general on J, or on C.35
W, U, Yoperate on any resultant of these, since each of these produces an
Nt V D, which is the form of the operand. Where the I or D of W is Sno,
the S (in SnO) can carry any transformations, since Sno is merely any S
preceded by that, whether,for--to. Where the I or Dis Sn' or Sn, the Scan
carry only such transformations as can be operated on by these nominalizations. 36
The C operate on two sentences SI, S2 to produce a single sentence
S3=SI C S2 (with C S as Jon K), or S3=SI plus a local J as residue of
the C S2' Therefore they can operate on their own resultant: C (S C S, S)
and C (S, S C S), as well as on resultants of almost all other qJ. In the case of
Ceo' each of the two S has to be of the form An is Ae (or a form derived
therefrom), with the result that Ceo can only repeat on a pair S CcoS, SCcoS.
In the repetition of wh, two different results are obtained, according as
whether the Nt common to S 2 and S 3 is the same as the NJ common to SI
and S2, or not. If i=j, then we have from SI wh S2:

226

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

Xl N; Yl wh N; S2-Ni =X 1 Ni wh Ni S2-Ni Y 1
and repeating the operation for (Sl wh S2) wh S3:
(Xl Ni wh Ni S2-N i Y1) wh Ni S3-Ni =
Xl N; wh N; S3-N; wh N; S2-N i Y1
Thus, Sl wh S2:
The book which he wrote is rather poor;
with wh S3:
The book which sold so well which he wrote is rather poor.
If i# j, i.e. if different N in S 2 are involved in the two applications of wh, then,
taking as an example S2=Nj V2 N j : we have from S2 wh S3:
Nj V2 Ni wh Nj S3-Nj = Nj wh Nj S3-N j V 2 N;
and from Sl wh (S2 wh S3):
Xl N; Y 1 wh (Ni Nj wh N j S3-Nj V2)=X 1 Ni wh Ni Nj wh
S3-N j V2 Yl'
Thus, S2 wh S3:
The quartet which the prince commissioned was to make him
famous.
with wh Sl:
The quartet which the prince who favored Beethoven commissioned was to make him famous.
We see here that the repetition of wh takes two different forms, not
because of a different mode of operation, but because of the extra degree of
freedom in wh as to which N is common to the participating sentences.
The zeroing operations have only limited possibilities of repetition,
because of the way they operate originally. Thus given Sl Cc S2 -+ S1 Cc X 2 ,
there are only limited possibilities for zeroing in S 3 in the resultants
(Sl Cc X 2) Cc S3 or S3 Cc (Sl Cc X 2)'
Thus from Sl Cc S2 Cc S3 :
John likes Bach and I like Bach and I like Stravinsky.
we obtain (Sl Cc X 2 ) Cc S3:
John and I like Bach and I (like) Stravinsky.
where the second I cannot be zeroed because its would-be antecedent I is only
in an insert (Cc X 2 ) within Sl' Or we obtain Sl Cc (S2 CcX3):
John likes Bach and I (like) Bach and Stravinsky.

THE ELEMENTARY TRANSFORMATIONS

227

where the second Bach cannot be zeroed because it carries an insert (Cc X 3)
in S2 which its antecedent in SI does not. Similarly, in SI Ce S2 Ce S3:
John likes Bach and I prefer Mozart and John likes Stravinsky.
nothing can be zeroed because S2 contains no words with antecedents in SI'
and S3 none with antecedents in S2. 37
We thus have different repetition effects: In a sequence of conjoined S,
the zeroing (and difference-counting) in each S depends on the preceding S.
In any sequence SI wh S z wh S 3, the form of wh S 3 depends on S 2 or on SI
(depending on the Nwhich S3 shares with its antecedent). In a repetition of
J on a K, each J acts independently on the K. And Ceo repeats only on a
CeQ pair. All these effects, however, differ only because of the conditions
met in each case by the single mode of operation of lp on lp defined above.

7.4. Same Increment in Different Transforms
If a particular increment can be transformed from one lp-type into another,
e.g. from J or C to W, it will have a different relation to other lp-applications,
according to the lp-type in which it is appearing. For example, since the C
increment in SI C. S2 can be transformed into the W increment in SIn is
C. S2' we can have this W from repeat, yielding (SIn is C. Sz)n is C. C 3 :
His going there was because he thought she was still in.
His going there being because he thought she was still in was
because he wanted to see her.
This can be transformed back into S C. S form:
He went there because he thought she was still in, because he
wanted to see her.
But we also have wh on this Sn is C. S, yielding
(SIn is C. S3) wh (SIn is C. S2)-+
SIn C. S2 is C. S3 38 :
His going there was because he wanted to see her.
His going there was even though he was still tired.
His going there even though he was still tired was because he
wanted to see her.
Transforming back into S Cs S form, we obtain
He went there, even though he was still tired, because he wanted
to see her.
In a similar way, one can obtain

228

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

(Sin is p. S2n) wh (S2n is C. S3)
His going there was because of his wanting to see them.
His wanting to see them was because they were famous.
His going there was because of his wanting to see them because
they were famous.
He went there, because he wanted to see them because they were
famous.
Other combinations of repeated Cs-transforms are possible, all ultimately
reducible to a sequence of subordinate conjunctions S CsS ... C.S, in which
the various transformational equivalents are discernible as different readings,
partially distinguished by commas, of the long sentence.
In a similar way we have:
His quiet announcing of the defeat affected everyone.
from:
h ~ His announcing of the defeat affected everyone. (W)
w (The announcing of the defeat was quiet. (W form of Dm).
Without zeroing of wh- and the constant was, this is identical with:
His announcing of the defeat, which was quiet, affected everyone.
In contrast, there is:
His announcing the defeat quietly affected everyone.
from affected everyone operating as

v.. Q on:

He announced the defeat quietly.
But the latter has the transform (as above)
His announcing the defeat was quiet.
and if the W Q operates on this transform we obtain the equivalent
His announcing of the defeat being quiet affected everyone.
In the first case, we have W on K and Dm on K (the latter necessarily in W
form) connected by comma-who In the second case, we have Woperating on
Dm which has operated on K.

8. THE NETWORK OF SENTENCE DIFFERENCES
We can now consider what is the effect of the elementary operations above,
and hence all transformations (which are only successions of these), on the

THE ELEMENT AR Y TRANSFORMA TIONS

229

set of sentences in the language. The fact that the resultants of these operations (except for the asyntactic) are K-Iike means that given an initial set of
K sentences which have different K structures for different subcategories, the
operations yield additional sets of sentences showing the same structural
differences, except that for the new sentences, these structural differences
now obtain between sentence sets which have the same sets of word-selections.
Furthermore, the fact that the analogic operations do their part of this only
by paralleling existing transformational relations (except in the case of 4.6)
means that the kinds of structural difference for same word-selection are only
those brought in by the increment and redundancy operations (and by the
4.6 analogy). Each of the elementary operations increases the variety of
material (subcategories, sequences) occupying K-positions (.E, V, Q or next
to these), without adding to the stock of word-selection-acceptances of
sentences of the kernel. 39
The main effect, then, of elementary transformations is to bring the wordselections of one K; structure into the form of another K J structure; i.e. a
transformation cP; takes the sets of simultaneous occupants of the KI positions, together with some constants of CPt, into particular positions of K j • It is
for this reason that we can look upon a transformation as an operation,
which derives the presence of a particular set of word-selections occupying
the positions of K j from their occupancy of positions of K;.
The problem of transformations as directional operations can only be
touched upon here. There are many considerations which support a view of
the elementary transformations as being directed operations, and not
merely equivalences. In the case of the increments (including affixation) and
redundancy-removing, it is clearly natural to think of an operation from a
structure A to a structure consisting of A plus increment or excision, rather
than merely to say that a set of word-selections occurs with and without
these increments or excisions. There is also the fact of linguistic productivity,
in which we can see the novel appearance of the word-selection of some
structure A appearing in a structure B in which it had not occurred before.
There are also situations in which the word selections of form S" and those of
Sb appear both in Se and in Sd. This can be conveniently described by saying
that while two operations took the word-selections of S" into Se' and of Sb
into Se, one further operation took those of Se into Sd. Thus forms with
.E = Sno come from various sources, but all participate on Sno V Q-+ It V Q
Sno.

The existence of operations along a directed path may be seen in the
residue left by some of the intermediate operations. An example of this is in
the transformations which require or prefer the presence of a D, even though
the D seems not to be involved in the transformationally related forms. For

230

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

example, there is for certain Va transformational relation between Nl V N 2
and N2 V D, a relation which is supported by the fact that it is productive,
though uncomfortable:
People sell this book, This book sells easily.
They pasted the wallpaper, The wallpaper didn't paste nicely.
The N 2V cannot be directly related to the Nl V N 2 by any known operation;
and in any case we have to explain why the form is much more acceptable
with D than without it. The D, however, can serve to indicate a possible
succession of elementary operations which would account for N 2 V D:
(1)
(2)
(3)

(4)
(5)
(6)

Nl VN 2
Nl V N2 A ly
One V N2 A ly (indefinite
pronoun)
One's Ving of N2 is A
The Ving of N2 is A
(drop indef. I:)
N2 V Aly

He sells this book.
He sells this book easily.
One sells this book easily.
One's selling of this book is easy.
The selling of this book is easy.
This book sells easily.

We obtain (6) from (5) by the inverse of the K A ly-+Kn is A operation
(Section 4.6) which had given (4) out of (3). The form Ving of N is A has two
sources, one in which the N is the I (The singing of birds was soft), and one in
which the N is the Q (The singing of the chorales was loud.); these are in
general discriminable only by co-occurrence. If a sentence of this form
receives an inverse of K A ly-+Kn is A toward the 'wrong' source, we obtain
such a result as (6) from (1) above. In this way there arises a limited relation
N1 V N2 A ly-+N2 V A ly. The D is present, therefore, because it was a step
in the succession of operations; since it was the nominalization of K under
is A that made it possible to reconstruct N 2 , instead of the lost N1 , as the I.
There can thus be little doubt as to the descriptive value of a succession of
operations to take us from one form to another. Nevertheless, there are many
difficulties in the way of taking a directed operation as the only relation
between different S-forms of the same word-selections set. One is the
existence of inverse operations (4.2), which, even though they act on a
different set of word-selections than the operation they are paralleling, show
that the direction of the original operation was not a determining characteristic of it. In fact, nothing in the analogic extensions, which is to say nothing
in the way the first operations (1-4) are used for further extension, depends
upon the direction of the initial set of operations. A -+ Band B-+ A, and
sequences of such, serve equally well as a model for producing a new B' out
of A',

THE ELEMENTAR Y TRANSFORMA nONS

231

The fact that some forms B' can be described as related to A' on the analogy
of a relation between B and A, even though an A' source does not exist (4.3),
or at the cost of saying that only the product of the operations involved in
A -+ B acts on B' (4.4, 5), suggests that it is not the (directed) path to B that is
paralleled in producing B', but rather the pairing A, B.
Finally, if Sb can be related to Sa by a long succession of elementary
operations, it will often be found that it can also be related to Sa by other
successions of elementary operations. The long paths are often not unique.
There are thus many problems about a system of directed operations
which takes us from the K to all the resultant sentences of the language.
But even if one does not wish to accept a particular path of elementary
transformations between Sa and Sb as a 'derivation' of Sb from Sa> it remains
that if the difference between Sa and Sb is more than an elementary transformation, then sentences having partial (intermediate) differences between
Sa and Sb exist, in most cases. And even if the particular K and elementary
operations proposed here are rejected in favor of some other set of K and
transformations, the fact would remain that for every sentence in the language we would be able to find other sentences containing the same wordselection and differing from it in structure by only the differences exhibited
in the elementary operations above (or in some equivalent set of elementary
differences) or in some succession of them. The elementary transformations
constitute, for the sentences of the language, a system of connectives more
than of derivations.
It is this network of elementary differences among sentences, in particular
sentences of the same word-selection, that is the most definite result. Indeed,
small differences reaching over a range of sentence structures can be seen
even outside of transformations. The similarity of all K structures, as
expressed in E t V n, is not transformational. In the U operators, we saw
several sets of operators which ranged in many properties from ones similar
to Y to ones similar to W; but the various subcategories of U contained
different words, so that in general one U form is not a transform of another.
In the case of sentences which are transformationally equivalent, the
differences are of a much more definite kind: They are not simply a matter of
similarity, but are the precise differences which are sufficient to house the
increments and excisions in kernel-like forms (i.e. in a stated and minor
extension) of the K structures. The differences thus form a system, namely
that of 2.1-4. It is natural to view the moving of a word-selection set over one
of these differences as a derivation. 4o But in some cases a descriptively
possible derivation is historically unnatural. For example, it is possible to
derive the plural affix from sequences Nand N ... and N; whereas and cannot
be derived from the plural affix. Similarly, by using otherwise existing

232

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

operations, it is possible to derive all question forms and imperative forms
from assertion forms with performative W operators; but one might hesitate
to claim that indeed questions exist in the language only by virtue of this
derivation. The descriptive derivations are nevertheless of interest both for a
systematic analysis and a normalization of the structure of language, and
also for the transformational equivalence which they show between, e.g.
singular and plural sentences, or assertions and questions.

9. SUMMARY
We have seen here that the sentences of English can be characterized by a
small family of elementary sentence structures and a few small families of
elementary transformations on these. Specifically:
(1) a small family of elementary sentence forms K=I V D (I=N,·
D=zero, N, PN, and a few more), each K-form having particular wordselections for its categories.
(2) three types of increment to K: inserts to K or to parts of K, mostly
short, and all in very small classes except for the adverbs; operators on V
and on K which themselves become the V of the resultant K-like structure;
connectives which adjoin a second K to a first.
(3) the removal of material which becomes redundant when two entities
(K, insert, or operator) are juxtaposed in accordance with (2) above. The
zeroing is carried out in such a way that the resultant maintains a K-like
structure (6). Since only material that can be determined is dropped, we can
say that the material is still morphemically present, that only its phonemes
become zero, and that the language therefore has no dropping of morphemes.
(4) analogic extensions of these operations and their inverses, to subcategories on which they had not been defined, but in such a way as to
produce new sentences of structure similar to extant sentences. Only rarely
does this involve the setting up of new transformational relations.
(5) a very few asyntactic operations which permute the parts of a K so that
it is no longer K-like.
These structural components are also semantically characterizable. Strong
co-occurrence restrictions on words appear only within a K, and between V
and the Dm (PNm) insert. The insertions are in general modifiers of that next
to which they are inserted. The V of the K, and the Y, U and Woperators are
all verbs or predicates with distinct semantic differences between one set and
the other. The semantic differences among the various types of C can be
readily related to differences in the requirements which they make as to the
similarity between the two K which they connect. And so down to more
delicate distinctions in subcategories. Idioms and metaphors are distin-

THE ELEMENTAR Y TRANSFORMATIONS

233

guishable as word-co-occurrences which do not accept all of the transformations that the others in their set do. Linguistic jokes and nonce forms
are distinguishable as extensions, usually of type 4.6, made on one member of
a word-selection set and not on the rest.
And above all: all substantive information is contained in the K and the
incremental operations. Redundancy removal, analogic extension, and the
asyntactic permutations vary the style or subjective character of a sentence
but not its information. And every S can be mapped by these transformations
onto the K and increments it contains (in their particular interrelation).
The elementary operations are not so loose as to permit all word combinations to appear as an English sentence. One can study the total range of
structures (say, within any given length) that can be produced by any combination of these operations, and it will be seen that they produce a particular
set of category-sequences and, within these, only partiCUlar rearrangements
of the occupants of K positions. As a result, the structure of English sentences,
without taking into account the K-occupant rearrangements, remains the
r t V Q of the K, except that the values of these variables is now given not
only by the list for K, but also by the additions and changes due to the
elementary operations.
Every K structure is a model for some transformation, and every wordselection set is present in more than one structure, i.e. enters into transformations. Every transformation is an elementary operation (an elementary
difference) or a succession of these. Every sentence is a K, or can be said to be
obtained from a K by a succession of elementary operations. No new concepts are needed to explain the form of this or that sentence, except for
restrictions on the application of elementary operations, or for the arbitrariness of which subclass extensions are made by the analogic operation.
More generally, aside from specifiable petrified forms, only such sentences
exist in the language as differ from other sentences of the same wordselections by various ones of the elementary differences only or by products
of these. If we think in terms of the obvious gross transformations, such as
passive and question, then we see that each sentence makes its large transformations out of material that is also used in different combinations in
other transformations; each use of such material being necessarily itself a
component transformation over the whole sentence. Thus for a sentence
to fit into the grammar is for it to participate in this network of transformational differences.
NOTES
1 'Change' here refers to: the adding of a morpheme which does not occur in elementary
sentences (called sentences of the kemel), e.g. affixes, such as -ing; the appearance, as a

234

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

constant of transformations, of certain morphemes which occur also in kernel S (e.g.
informationally weak V like be, do; metaphorical uses of certain Vlike take, and of P like
by); the permutation of certain kernel-S parts (e.g. of E and n in So says he). S indicates
sentence.
2 The operation of zeroing is not presented here because it is discussed in 'Transformational
Theory', § 5.2, Lg. 41 (1965). (paper 10 of this volume.)
3 In addition to these symbols, Xi (where j = one of the defined subcategories of X)
indicates the j subcategory of X, and Xy indicates a word of category X which upon
receiving affix y occurs in the position of category Y. Xl, where i is a number or an undefined subscript of X, indicates an individual member i of X. K (X) indicates K containing
X; aside from this, (X) indicates that X is omittable from the form in which it appears. X
indicates a pronoun of X. Occasionally, X/Y will be used to indicate 'X or Y'. * or ~
before an example indicates that it does not occur as a sentence of the language; (*)
indicates that it is uncomfortable except in suitable context. The position which a word X
occupies in a structure A will be called the position of X; or a position in A, or an Aposition.
4 There is a third, very restricted member of this set, the be--en of He is gone.
S V. indicates either V.B or VB ..
6 The forms N's, of N, by N which the E receives, and the form (1) P n which the n may
receive, are similar structurally (and in their acceptance of many further operations)
to certain primitive inserts on N (sec. 1). They will be called insert-forms of E, n. The
forms Ving, Vn are similar to N in their acceptance of many operations (including
plural).
7 A special subset of W.k is seen in It seemed that he wrote the letter, It is merely that he
wrote the letter, etc., where be plus not or D g , and a few Vof the be-set, occur only with It
as E (as in the K-structure with It).
8 Although the Kn o are most conveniently analyzed as E and n of W, like Kn' and Kn, an
alternative analysis could take them as separate K connected by that, whether, for to
another Kbuilt out of the W. Such an alternative is particularly suggestive for the Wwhich
have N as well as K in their object. There is indeed a similar form in certain marginal
Cs: that in He fled to the woods, (in order, so) that he might live; for in He shouted loudly,
(in order) for them to notice him; They called a strike, (in order, so as) to protect their
working conditions; whether in I'll go, whether they come or not. Whereas the C, connect
a Ka to a preceding KI, these three (with ifalso) connect K to an operator W which may be
looked upon as an 'incomplete' K: N Vor V n.
9 The insert-character differs for the various C: CBS is like an insert on K (sentenceadjunct); wh S is like an insert to the right of N; CcX (as residue of CcS, inserted to the
right of X) is somewhat like an adjunct on X, but an N subject in singular with and N
inserted after it takes plural verb.
35 The occurrence of Dg on C. originates in the sentence-operator form: He came primarily because she was sick ...... His coming was primarily because she was sick. Thus,
primarily is Dg on was rather than on CB•
36 Some details were given in 2.1-3.
37 This chain property characterizes the zeroing procedure of Cc but not all zeroing
procedures. The chain appears in Cc even when zeroing is not involved: the difference
which or, but require in connected S do not apply between Sa and Sl in Sl Cc Sa Cc S3.
C is an operation on pairs.
38 The form Sn is C. is often uncomfortable. However, it is a possible form, and is
subject to wh because Sn is operated on here in the same way that N is. If we did not
want to go through this form we would need another formulation for this kind of C.
repetition.
39 A partial exception: The Dm (adverbs of manner, Section 1), alone of all the increments,
have a selection restriction, to the V, of the kind that obtains within a K. While the Dm
appears in an insert position, various transformations bring it and its V into positions of a

THE ELEMENTARY TRANSFORMATIONS

235

K structure, thus producing a new selectionaI relation within a K structure. As to the

asyntactic operations, they neither increase the variety of material nor do they add to the
stock of selections.
40 The historical and the psychological reality of these derivations is another matter. Some
undoubtedly reflect the path of development of a form. Others may be only a way of
exhibiting the parallel to various component transformations. Still others may show an
analogic trend which is growing in the language. What does not show the past may be
showing the future.

10

TRANSFORMATIONAL THEORY*

1. STYLES OF GRAMMAR AND PROPERTIES OF SENTENCES
It may be helpful to understand transformational analysis in the light of
other styles of grammatical analysis. The establishment of descriptive
linguistics as a successful research method, and the piling up of grammatical
descriptions, have made possible the investigation of various types of
grammatical relation. Different ways of analyzing sentence-structures have
been found or proposed; these are characterized by different kinds of
aspects in terms of which the sentences of a language are described. Traditional
grammar established various distinguished segments of sentences which
were hierarchically subdivided into smaller segments (in a manner made
explicit by Leonard Bloomfield, as the method of immediate constituents),
or were altered by a grammatical process (in a manner developed, for example,
in the work of Edward Sapir). Another decomposition is given by string
analysis, in which each sentence is segmented into one center string and a
number of adjunct strings which are adjoined to the center or adjunct strings.
In describing sentence structure, string analysis differs from constituent
analysis primarily in that it isolates a distinguished elementary sentence and
elementary adjuncts within each sentence, whereas constituent analysis does
not directly express the fact that the heads of the various constituents of a
sentence or constituent X, at a given level of constituency, make up a
sentence or adjunct string which can by itself appear in the linguistic environments in which X appears. That is, if a sentence or adjunct string X
consists of constituents A (composed, in constituent terms, of head-of-A
plus remainder-of-A) and B (composed of head-of-B plus remainder-of-B),
then the environments in which the sequence head-of-A plus head-of-B can
occur are closely related to the environments in which X can occur: they are
the same (as in I walked home briskly. The air was clear and I walked home.
The air was clear) or the same except for parallel remainders within connected
sentences (as in I walked slowly. But John walked briskly), or the like. 1 Thus
in the sentence
Language 41, No.3 (1965), 363-401.

236

TRANSFORMATIONAL THEORY

237

However, a sample which a young naturalist can obtain directly is
often of value
we have
(1) center string: a sample is of value;
(2) adjunct on 1 : however;
(3) right-adjunct on subject of 1: which a naturalist can obtain;
(4) left-adjunct on subject of 3: young;
(5) (right)-adjunct on verb of 3: directly;
(6) adjunct on 1: often. 2
If we compare the statements in string analysis with those in constituent
analysis, we see that constituent analysis gives a hierarchical subdivision (in
principle unbounded) of a sentence and its parts into parts, whereas string
analysis gives a center and adjuncts, the adjoining of some adjuncts being in
principle unboundedly repeatable. The fact that an adjunct may adjoin
another adjunct is equivalent to part of the hierarchy in constituent description, but certain pseudo-hierarchical features of constituent description
are replaced by the sequential composition of elementary strings and by the
repeatability of certain adjunctions. 3
Transformational analysis yields yet another decomposition of sentences:
into sentences and operations on them, ultimately into elementary sentences
K and elementary operations (fJ which operate on K and (fJ. The operations
(transformations) thus decompose a sentence into sentences. In the above
example we have (using here a rough formulation of transformations):
(1) elementary sentence: a sample has value;
(2) elementary sentence: a naturalist obtains a sample,'
(3) elementary sentence: a naturalist is young;
(4) however (sentence-insert) operating on sentence 1, yielding a sentence;
(5) often (sentence-insert) operating on sentence I, yielding a sentence;
(6) has N-+is of N (for a certain subcategory of N);
(7) wh- connective on sentences 1, 2, yielding a sentence;
(8) can (verb-operator) on sentence 2;
(9) directly (adverbial insert) on sentence 2;
(10) wh- connective on sentences 2, 3, yielding a sentence;
(11) zeroing of who is in 10, with permutation of remainder of sentence 3.
Transformational analysis is relevant to linguistics because (1) it is possible
to give formal and reasonable criteria for decomposing a sentence into
sentences, and this by means of a reasonably small set of transformations; (2)
the set of sentences of the language has an interesting structure, and one
which has a semantic interpretation, under the transformational operations;
(3) the set of transformations also has an interesting structure, and is not
merely an arbitrary list of operations sufficient to decompose sentences into

238

STR UCTURAL AND TRANSFORMA TIONAL LINGUISTICS

sentences. Transformational analysis is of particular interest, first, because
it can be described and investigated with algebraic tools, and second, because
it provides exceptionally subtle analyses and distinctions for sentences. 4
To interrelate these analyses, it is necessary to understand that these are
not competing theories, but rather complement each other in the description
of sentences. 5 It is not that grammar is one or another of these analyses, but
that sentences exhibit simultaneously all of these properties. Indeed one can
devise modifications of languages, say of English, which lack one property
while retaining the others; but the result is not structurally the same as the
original language. Thus English sentences, taken transformationally as they
now are, would have no simple string structure if the words due to separate
elementary sentences were intermixed irregularly in the transformational
resultant; and the sentences would have no string structure at all if transformations combined morphemes from separate elementary sentences into
novel product-morphemes (portmanteau blends).
Each of these properties can be used as the basis for a description of the
whole language because the effects of the other properties can be brought in
as restrictions on the chosen property. For example, the string restriction on
transformations can be expressed as follows: Consider a string of 21 positions,
which can be expanded by repeatable insertion of s, /, r on s,l, r:

sIN r s I V r s 1ill r siP r s 1 N2 r s
where the tense (and auxiliaries) is left out to be added after any transformations, and where
s: adjunct on sentence
I, r: left and right adjuncts of their neighboring category
N, V, P: noun, verb, preposition word-categories
ill: first section of object; may be empty
P N 2 : second section of object; empty except for some cases of ill =
N,A
(If ill or P or P N2 is empty, their I, r, and following s positions are also
empty.) We can say that each transformation takes the words which are in
specified positions of one or of two such strings and sends them, with
possibly some added constants (including primitive adjuncts and operators)
and zeroings, into specified positions of such a string. This conforms with
two facts: that sentences have a quite limited string structure, and that
transformations operate on a sentence, or on two, to produce a sentence. 6 The
string property of the resultant sentence can thus be stated as a restriction on
the transformation which yields that resultant.
Conversely the effect of each transformation on a sentence can be stated as
a restriction on the string structure of that sentence. This is seen as follows:

TRANSFORMATIONAL THEORY

239

Consider the string structure of a subset of sentences which we will call
elementary. Here all the s, t, r positions are empty, and the N, V, Q1, P, N2
positions are filled by particular subcategories (largely of unimorphemic
words). It can be shown that each transformation which operates on an
elementary sentence brings into one or another of the positions a subcategory
which had not occurred there in the string structure of the sentence on which
the transformation had operated. By asking what subcategories occur in
each string position of a sentence - which is a question in purely string terms
- we obtain the same information about the sentence as we would by asking
what transformations had operated to produce the sentence.
Comparable statements can be made for constituent analysis, and in this
sense each of these major sentential properties can be formulated so as to include the relevant effects of the other properties and so as to describe in its
own terms the whole set of sentences. 7 In organizing a language description
around one or another of these properties, the main difference lies not in the
sentences which can be described, but in the way in which the description
relates each sentence to certain others, i.e. in the various subsets of sentences
that the description creates. Constituent analysis groups all sentences having
similar hierarchical complexities; string analysis groups sentences which
have the same center, or the same types of adjunction; transformational
analysis groups sentences which have the same kernel (elementary) sentences,
or the same transformations - i.e. each transformation is a set of sentence
pairs, and transformational theory creates or characterizes these pairs.
However, the greatest interest in each of these properties lies not in its
utilization as an organizing scheme for grammatical analysis, but in the
statements which can be made, uniquely in terms of the given property,
about the structure oflanguage. For example, in terms of the string property
we can make the fundamental statement that if we define in a given language
a small set of center strings and a few sets of adjunct strings - each set being
characterized by its adjoining a particular type of string at a particular point
in it - then (aside from grammatical ambiguity) each sentence can be
decomposed in a mechanical way into one center sentence and certain
adjunct strings. 8 There are, besides, additional interesting statements which
can be made in terms of each property. For example, in terms of string
analysis, we can say that the discontinuous elements of constituent analysis
present no problem of noncontiguity (relation at a distance). Every relation
(co-occurrence or selection, agreement, structural composition, etc.) holds
within a string (among the symbols of a string) or else between a string (or
its first member) and the string to which it is adjoined. Thus the 'movable'
adjective in Latin, and the 'detached' relative clause of My friend came,
whom I had mentioned to you, are indeed distant from their nouns, but they

240

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

are contiguous to the string containing that noun; they cannot be noncontiguous to that string or its adjuncts.
It should be mentioned that the investigation of the several basic properties
of sentences, and the possibility of using each as the central method of
sentence analysis, are different from the question of the logical forms of
grammar as a theory of language. The properties, e.g. the transformational
relation, can be studied empiricaIIy; and a particular form of grammar can
use various of these properties. 9

2. CRITERIA FOR TRANSFORMATION
Before considering the transformational structure of a language, it might be
well to state under what conditions two sentences (or sets of sentences) are
transforms of each other; here we offer this, rather than a definition of transformation. Take an n-place form, i.e. a sequence of n symbols for wordcategories such as N, V, with possibly some individual morphemes which
will be called constants of the form e.g. (1) Nl t V N2 P N3 (t: tense morpheme; the subscripts are only for distinguishing the various occurrences
of N).
We now take ordered n-tuples of words, each containing one member for
each word-category in the sentence-form, e.g. (2):
man, give, book, to, boy.
man, give, book, to, girl.
man, give, boy, to, table.

The result of substituting the words of an n-tuple for the category-symbols of
the sentence-form (allowing for morphophonemic and other requirements,
such as the article) will be called a satisfier of the form, e.g. (3):
The man gave a book to the boy.
The man gave a book to the girl.
The man gave a boy to the table.

Among these satisfiers there are some differences in their acceptability as sentences, differences which make them partially ordered on a scale of naturalness, likelihood of occurrence in particular language use (e.g. scientific
articles, fairy tales), type (including, presumably, timing) of response by
particular hearers, or the like. Or the satisfiers are differentiated, not linearly,
on several such scales.
Consider now another sentence form of the same n word-categories, say (4)
N2 t be Ven by N1 P N 3 • If we find a set of n-tuples whose satisfiers X of the
first form have the same order on this scale as their satisfiers Y of the second

TRANSFORMATIONAL THEOR Y

241

form, we say that the two forms can be taken as transforms of each other for
that set of n-tuples (or: the two sets of sentences can be transforms of each
other).10 Whether they are indeed so taken will depend on whether the set of
n-tuples is not ad hoc, i.e. whether it can be characterized in some useful
way in respect to other sets ofn-tuples: for example, whether the set appears
again in transformations to yet other sentence-forms, whether the set is
characterizable by some morphological or syntactic property (e.g. if it
contains all V which can have - or lack - certain affixes, or certain types of
object), whether the complement set of n-tuples participates in other transformations, and so on. This is much the same kind of consideration as is used
in determining what categories of words are worth setting up in linguistic
structure. As with all linguistic classifications, the chosen criteria suffice
for the great bulk of the material; however, scattered residues will be found
which do not satisfy all the requirements of the chosen criteria, but can be
analyzed in such a way as to fit with the analysis of the bulk of the
language. Thus after the main transformations have been set up, it will be
convenient to define certain transformations for small sets of words which
are not otherwise recognized as sets. Such treatments are unavoidable
throughout linguistic analysis, because of the existence of aberrant detail
in language,11
It should be clear that the interest here is not in the actual acceptances that
a given n-tuple has in a given form (something which is often difficult to
evaluate), but in the fact that the ordering of acceptability for a set of ntuples is the same in several sentence forms (even if the actual acceptabilities,
or the aJ;llount of difference in acceptability, may differ in the several forms).
This suffices to relate the several forms in respect to the given set of n-tuples.
By this criterion, we can take forms (1) and (4) as transforms of each other
(written (1)+-+(4» for a set of n-tuples including (2), since the acceptabilityordering of (2) in (3) is the same as in (5):
A book was given by the man to the boy.
A book was given by the man to the girl.
A boy was given by the man to the table.

Both in (3) and in (5) the first two n-tuples yield normal acceptance, while
the third gives one pause. But when the same n-tuples are used as satisfiers of
(6) Nl t V N3 P N2 , we get a different acceptability-ordering:
The man gave the boy to a book.
The man gave the girl to a book.
The man gave the table to a boy.

Hence (1)+++(6).

242

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

Furthermore, the transformation (l)~(4) does not hold for such n-tuples
as (7):
man, practise, hour, on, Tuesday
man, walk, mile, on, Tuesday
which are acceptable in (1), but have no or only special acceptance in (4);
as in
"" 3 An hour was practised by the man on Tuesday.
"" 3 A mile was walked by the man on Tuesday.
Note, however, that (1) is acceptable in (8) N1 V for N2 P N3 as in
The man practised for an hour on Tuesday.
The man walked for a mile on Tuesday.
so that for (1) we have (I)~(8).
In the light of this criterion we can see, for example, that (9) N1 t V N2 is
not a transform of (10) N2 t V Nl . True, there are n-tuples whose acceptability-ordering is presented in the two forms, e.g. in John saw Bill and Bill
saw John. But for each V there can be found nouns whose acceptabilityordering as objects of that V is not the same as their acceptability-ordering
as subjects of it, as can be seen from Can the deaf see the blind? Even if the N
are restricted to personal names we can find such cases, as in Did John see
Helen Keller?12 There is thus no independent property which would characterize the n-tuples whose acceptability-ordering is the same in (9) and (10)
from those for which it is not,13
Similarly, (11) A Nt t V N2 is not a transform of (12) Nt t V A N 2. For (11)
is a transform of the pair of forms (13) Nl t V N 2 , Nt is A (by the connective
wh on Nt), while (12) is a transform of (14) N1 t V N 2, N2 is A (by the connective wh on N 2); and even if Nl and N2 are the same word, we can always
find, for each V, some set of A such that the acceptability-ordering of n-tuples
containing these A in (11) and in (13) is not preserved (in the manner of note
12) in (12) and in (14).
It is possible to define transformations, as a relation among sentences, in
various ways.14 All adequate formulations ultimately yield virtually the same
transformations for a language. 15 The formulation sketched here in terms of
acceptability-differences fits into the fact that there is no well-defined set of
sentences in a language. Rather, some word sequences are clearly sentences,
others are odd or even undecidable as to sentencehood in one or another way,
and some are entirely impossible. In terms of transformational theory, we can
say that all these differences and types of acceptability are to be found in the
elementary sentence-forms, in respect to the satisfaction of these forms by
various word n-tuples. The transformations preserve the acceptability-

TRANSFORMATIONAL THEOR Y

243

ordering (and so the normalcy, jocularity, marginality, etc.) of these n-tuple
satisfactions, from the elementary sentence-forms into all the other sentenceforms of the language. It is thus possible to find a precise set of transformations in a language without having to state a precise set of sentences
for the language. Transformations simply tell us that the sense in which an
n-tuple satisfies a particular complex sentence-form is the same as that in
which it satisfies some other (and ultimately, some elementary) sentenceform. As happens so often in science, in order to describe a particular set of
phenomena we have to start with a class of objects which is different from
our initial interest but which is precisely definable and in respect to which we
can describe our particular phenomena. In the present case, we set out to
describe a relation among sentences, but we have to define a relation among
sentence-forms in respect to certain n-tuples which satisfy them. l6
3. THE TRANSFORMATIONS
The transformations of English fall into certain types which in gross character seem to be the case for many other languages too.l7
3.1. Unaries

There are unary transformations between two sentence-forms. These include
some in which word-categories are permuted (or, rarely, repeated or dropped),
usually with the addition of some constant words or morphemes. In most or
all of these there is no substantive change of meaning, e.g. between the
active and the passive. In addition to the well-established transformations,
there are transformations which are barely acceptable or are used only in particular linguistic environments: e.g. He works at night-+His work is at night,
He prepared the experiment-+ The preparation of the experiment was by him.
Many of these latter transformations come in families, in which the individual
transformations apply a particular change to various parts of the sentenceform; e.g. the important set of extraction transformations: His story
describes Sicily-+ His story is what describes Sicily, It is his story that describes
Sicily, Sicily is what his story describes, It is Sicily that his story describes.
We could also find He left it on the table-+The table is what he left it on. In
several such families we find parts of the sentence for which the transformation is more complicated or difficult, e.g. the extraction of the verb in
Describing Sicily (or: To describe Sicily) is what his story does. There may
even be parts of the sentence such that we cannot say whether the family of
transformations extends to them or not: He wrote the story within one week-+
(?) One week is what he wrote the story within, * Within one week is when he
wrote the story.

244

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

Many such cases of difficult or uncertain transformations would not even
be noticed if it were not for having a family of transformations, which
operate in comparable ways on various parts of a sentence, and which we
then discover to be neither definitely acceptable or definitely unacceptable
on certain other parts of the sentence, but rather partially acceptable in
various ways.
As will be seen, the great majority of transformations listed below operate
on all words of the major word-categories on which they act, or on all words
which do or don't come from particular other transformations (e.g. the
passive does not act on N2 which have come from the P-zeroing transformation of § 3.4). A few, like the instrumental, act on a particular subcategory of V, N, etc. And a few, like the middle, act on small subcategories
but are productive with weakened acceptability outside the subcategory.
The transformations of a language can be grouped in various ways. Here
we will group the main unary transformations of English in a way that will be
useful for the further decomposition of transformations in § 5 below.
One type of transformation is that which permutes parts of an elementary
sentence (and, in some cases, an insert to it), without adding any constants,
in such a way as to yield a form that differs from any elementary sentenceform of the language. Such are:
Nl t V N2 ~ N2 Nl t V: I like this, This I like.
Nl t V N2 -+ N2 t V N 1 : All the scientists say this,
This say all the scientists.

There is no change in the syntactic character of the parts (i.e. the subjection
to major transformations and morphophonemics, as in plural agreement):
e.g. This does not become the subject and does not agree in number with say.
Hence we may call these the ASYNTACTIC transformations. They are uncomfortable except in cases where the permuted object is stressed and where
ambiguity is not likely (e.g. This say ... is not ambiguous because the number
differs). All other transformations yield sentences which have elementary
sentence-forms (though with new items satisfying some of the symbols) plus,
possibly, adjuncts.
Another small type of transformation is the addition of PLEONASTIC
material in a way that does not destroy elementary sentence-form (e.g. the
addition being in the form of an insert):
Nl t V N2 -+ Nl t V N 1's N 2 : He learned a lesson,
He learned his lesson.
(his is not independent here; ",3 He learned her lesson, except in a different

sense, with a different transformational analysis).

TRANSFORMATIONAL THEORY

245

An important transformation is the replacement of words (chiefly nouns)
by PROWORDS (pronouns): The man came, He came.
Another transformation is the substitution one for another of semantically
weak verbs or VERBALIZING suffixes, which give various forms to sentences
whose information is carried by two nouns, or by noun and adjective:

He lived in a room there, He stayed in a room there, He roomed
there.
It has value, It is oj value.
He was sick, He became sick, He sickened.
Yet another is the replacement of subject by object in what we may call the
MIDDLE (between active and passive):

I attach this interpretation to your words, This interpretation
attaches to your words.
Another is the transformation which MIRRORS a sentence in its verb be:

Mathematics is his Jorte, His Jorte is mathematics.
Then there is the large set of MODULATIONS noted above:

His work is at night; The preparation ojthe experiment was by him.
In these the nominalized verb appears as subject; but related to these are
transformations in which the subject is replaced by the object or by an added
indirect object peculiar to certain verbs:
e.g. the PASSIVE:
Nt t V N z -+ N z t be Yen by Nt: He saw the man,
The man was seen by him.
and passive-like transformations:

N1 t V N z -+ N z t be Yen P N1: The plan involves him, He is
involved in the plan.
and the INSTRUMENTAL (on a subcategory of V):
Nt t V N z with N3 -+ N3 t V N z : He cut the meat with a knife,
The knife cut the meat.
There is a set of quotation-forms and intonationally-marked moods:
Quotation: Social means not individual-+ 'Social' means not individual.
Question: He took the book-+Did he take the book?, Who took the book?,
What did he take?, What did he do?
Imperative: Take the book!
Optative: Would that he took the book!

246

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

Finally, there is the family of EXTRACTIONS mentioned above (Sicily is
what his story describes, etc.), and the ZEROING OF INDEFINITE PRONOUNS which
is seen in deletion of the object:

He read all day +- He read things all day,
in adjective used as noun:

I prefer the larger +- I prefer the larger one,
and in such limited constructions as indefinite pronoun (or classifier-noun)
plus preposition before noun of receptacle:

The whole room laughed+- All those in the room laughed.
3.2. Nonsentential Increments
The pure unaries listed above rearrange the words of a sentence, with some
zeroings or the addition of constants or repetitions. There are other operations, which add to a sentence-form a whole category of words. These
naturally alter the meaning of the sentence, but the added meanings are not
like the concrete meanings of the words in the elementary sentence; rather,
they are metasentential (in the sense of talking about the meanings in the
sentence), or relational, or aspectual, or they refer to conditions of time,
place, and manner, and so on. The addition of any of these increments to a
sentence yields again a sentence, and the resultant (as also in all the pure
unaries except the asyntactic) has an elementary sentence-form (with new
items satisfying some of the symbols) plus, possibly, adjuncts. It is therefore
possible to consider the addition of these increments to be unary transformations.
The main incremental unaries are the inserts, verb-operators, and sentenceoperators.
All inserts are adjuncts (modifiers) on a sentence or on one of its parts. A
sentence of the form Xl X 2 X 3 , with an insert J adjoined to Xi' is a sentence
with center Xl X 2 X 3 and adjunct J on Xi'
LOCAL INSERTS adjoin certain small subcategories, of vaguely quantitative
meanings, e.g. a to the left of N, very to the left of A, quite to the left (or
right) of V (or A), almost to the left of V or P.
TENSE INSERTS, which can perhaps be best considered as operating on t
(tense), have particular transformations on them, e.g. not (to the right of tin
the sentence-form), the auxiliaries (can, may, etc.) to the left of t.
SENTENCE-INSERTS occur in all positions, before or after any symbol of an
elementary sentence-form, e.g. however, in general. Some of these have
conjunctional force, others can be viewed as irregular residues of conjoined

TRANSFORMATIONAL THEORY

247

sentences; but as they appear at present, they form a set of primitive inserts
(not regularly derivable from second sentences).
ADVERBIAL INSERTS, D (mostly Aly) and P N, have some subcategories
only to the right of V (e.g. down, out), others in all or most of the positions
that sentence-inserts occupy.
All VERB-OPERATORS bring in a new V of certain special subcategories,
change the original V into what might be called the object of the new V (Vn,
Va, etc.); some also add or change a preposition before the N z object of the
old V.IS Thus:
N1 t VQ-+N1 t Vnew Vx(P)Q.
A special set of verb-operators (symbolized by Y) includes be-ing and
have-en: He is writing a story, He has written a story.
The other verb-operators (marked U) fall into several subcategories, of
which the main ones are the following:
be Va (P): A complicated set of changes, acting on special subcategories of V
e.g.
This destroys our trust -+ This is destructive of our trust.
He loves Italy -+ He is in love with Italy.
It irritated them-tIt was (very) irritating to them.
He is clever - t He is being clever.
The door sticks -+ The door is stuck.
be Vn P: acting on most V, mostly with -er:
He studies eclipses -+ He is a student of eclipses.
He builds bridges- He is a builder of bridges.
Ug Ving, Ut to V: on every V:
He began building bridges, He began to build bridges.
He stopped building bridges. (But '" 3 He stopped to build
bridges).

Uhg Ving, Uht to V: only on sentences whose subject is taken in a human-like
sense.
He tried building bridges, He tried to build bridges.
The electron tries to escape.
Ud (the) Ving P: on most or all V, but with varying acceptability.
He does the building of bridges,
He began the building of bridges.

Um VnP: on many V which have Vn (with zero or real affix):

248

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

He does studies of eclipses.
He makes studies of eclipses.
He began the study of eclipses, He began a study of eclipses.
He thinks of a repeat ~ He has thoughts of a repeat.

Un a Vn P: for each U just a few particular V, unextendable, with n usually
zero.
He kicked the door ~ He gave a kick to the door.
He looked at it ~ He took a look at it, He gave a look at it.
Uap Vn P: particular U 'appropriate' to particular V; the Uap is often the
same morpheme as the V or a classifier of it:

He slept quietly ~ He slept a quiet sleep.
He fears it ~ He feels fear of it.

Finally, there are the SENTENCE-OPERATORS (marked W), formed out of
particular subcategories of V, A, N. These are N V whose object is a slightly
deformed sentence, or they are V n (including is A, is N, is P N) whose
subject is a similarly deformed sentence. 19 The deformations are 20:
NtVn: (that)NtVn]
(that) N V n
marked Sno
ifNtVn
N's Ving n, marked Sn'
N's Vn of n, marked Sn

Examples:
I know (that) he came.
I prefer (that) he come, I prefer for him to come.
I wonder if he came or not, I wonder whether he came or not.

She appreciated his having signed the letter.
They imitated his signing of the letter.
That he came surprised me, '" is a fact, ... is the trouble.
That he came is important, For him to come is important.
Whether he will come or not is the question.
His leaving school occurred two years ago.
His leaving of school was secretive.

There are additional forms which occur only as objects of particular N V
and N is A. These include: 21
(P) Ni that N j t vn
(P) Ni ifNjt vn
(P) Ni that Nj V n, variant Ni to V n

TRANSFORMATIONAL THEOR Y

249

(P) Nj P N/s Ving n, with (P) N/s zeroed (for some W,

necessarily)
PSn'
PSn
N V n, with N accusative if pronoun.

Examples:
I told him that she came.
I reported to him that she came.
I asked (of) him if she came or not.
I ordered them that they be present, I ordered them to be present.
I required of them that they be present, I required of them to be
present.
I restrained him from going, I got him to thinking.
I refrained from buying paper-backs. 22
I am aware of his having come.
I made him come. 23

There is also a zero (and affix) causative in which the W contains no new
verb, but the N and V of the operand sentence are permuted:
The children sat ~ He seated the children.
The patient walked ~ The nurse walked the patient.

Just as in the pure unaries we had a pairing of sets of sentences with and
without certain structural changes, so in the incremental unaries we have a
pairing of sets of sentences with and without certain increments; the increments either are adjuncts or contain new verbs, and the new verb has either
the old V n as its object or else the whole old sentence as its subject or
object. In each case the paired sentence-forms are satisfied by the same ntuples with acceptability-ordering preserved, so that they are transforms of
each other for the given n-tuple sets. The structural difference in each pair
can be considered an operation which operates on the simpler member of the
pair, as operand, to yield the other member as resultant.
3.3. Binaries

There are also binary transformations operating on two sentences to yield
a resultant sentence. No conjunctional transformations operate on three
sentences at a time; but this may not apply to the connective verbs mentioned below. All the conjunctional transformations except the connective
verbs leave the first sentence unchanged (at least initially, before any further
transformation operates) and add a connective C or a deformation or both
to the second sentence, the modified second sentence having then (precisely

250

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

or partially) the position of an adjunct in respect to the first. Thus, the
connective and on the pair The man talked, The man drove yields

The man talked and the man drove; The man talked and drove.
The connective after yields:

The man talked after he drove; After he drove the man talked;
The man talked after driving; etc.
The wh-connective yields:

The man who drove talked.
Furthermore, most of the connectives require particular similarities and
particular minimal differences between the two sentences on which they act.
Thus, in the coordinate conjunctions, and requires no differences, or requires
at least one difference, but requires at least one difference in the predicate 24:

Years passed and years passed.
He will go or she will go.
He bought books but she bought flowers.
In the pure comparative conjunctions, the two participant sentences can
always be transformed into (or from) a canonical N is A form (below). In the
wh (relative clause) connective, the two sentences must have a noun in
common (i.e. the same member of the N category, as enlarged by any transformations, must appear in both), and in the second sentence the common
noun must be in a position from which it can be permuted to the head of its
sentence by an existing transformation. Thus:

wh [The man talked about it, The man drove]
= The man who drove talked about it.
wh [Hisfriend talked about it, Hisfriend J saw+-J saw hisfriend]
= His friend whom J saw talked about it.
In the subordinate conjunctions and the secondary comparatives (e.g. enough
for), the specification of differences is more involved and requires investigation.
The connectives of English fall into a few subcategories which are differentiated by the transformations that can operate upon them (§ 3.4):
Coordinate conjunctions: and, or, but (and secondarily comma, semicolon,
period). These permit particular zeroings and permutations; e.g. '" 3 and he
came, J went.
Subordinate conjunctions, C., in various subcategories:

TRANSFORMATIONAL THEORY

251

because, etc. before S: I came because he arrived.
while before S, Ving 0: I came while he arrived, I talked while
driving.
after before S, Sn':
I came after he left, I came after his
having left.
during before Sn:
I came during his signing of the letter.

These permit different zeroings and permutations; e.g. 3 Because he came, I
went.

Comparative conjunctions: -er (or: less) than, as much as between two sentences (not necessarily elementary) of N is A form. Existing transformations
relate this form to other sentence-forms, in the course of which the first
('adverbial') part of the connective (-er, less, as) is moved into various
positions of the first sentence as a marker of what is being compared. As an
example of a comparative sentence: A larger frame arrived than we had
ordered. Its canonical transform: The frame which arrived is large I er than I
the frame which we had ordered (is large). Weakened conditions on this yield
the properties of secondary comparatives, e.g. The frame is too large to
order.

The wh-connective takes a sentence containing a particular Ni and a second
sentence beginning (after suitable transformations) with the same N j , replaces Nj by a pronoun of it attached to wh; and inserts the thus deformed
second sentence as a right adjunct on the N j in the first sentence: as above.
wh also operates on the ordered pair (Sj, Sjn VO): He left, which surprised
me+-wh (He left, His leaving surprised me).

To the binaries must be added the subcategories of V which have two deformed S, one as subject and one as object:
That he felt responsible indicates that he knew everything.
That he knew everything follows from his having felt responsible.
The change of temperature caused a change of plans.
The size of the frame which arrived exceeded the size which we had
ordered.

Although these have the combined features of W with object Sand W with
subject S, they are not operators on a single sentence, as are the W, but on
two. Some of them can be related to subordinate and comparative conjunctions. In any case, they are connectives which do not leave the first
sentence unchanged, so that some of the string properties of conjunctions do
not apply to these connective V.25
3.4. Unaries on Increments and Binaries

To complete the transformational analysis of English sentences, we

252

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

recognize transformations which operate on the resultants of increments and
binaries somewhat as the pure unaries (§ 3.1) operate on elementary sentences: they permute, repeat, and zero various parts (symbols) ofthe resultant
sentence form, and add constants.
In the first place, various of the pure unaries are extended to operate on
some of these resultants. This requires the extension of the argument of the
unary; so that if for example the passive has been defined on certain Nt t V
N 2 , the domain of V and N2 is now extended to include U and Ving n
respectively (but not U and to V n):
Europeans soon began printing -+ Printing was soon begun by
Europeans

(but no passive of Europeans soon began to print), and also to include verbs of
Wand Sn° or Sn' or Sn:
They recognize that he came -+ That he came is recognized by them.

Of greater interest are the new, nonelementary, unaries which appear specifically on incremental and connected sentences. A simple example of these
is the permutation of t and N in the presence of certain D (adverbs)26:
He would little care to see her -+ Little would he care to see her.

Another permutation related to increments is the preference, in a sequence of
syntactically parallel items, to have the longer ones come later; this is
especially strong after the V, among the objects and verb-adjuncts. Thus:

n1 n 2 in the elementary S: He referred a man to the office.
short D27, and n: He broke up the game.
n shortened by pronouning: He broke it up.
n 1 lengthened by adjunction: He referred to the office a man
who had been making persistent
inquiries.

The adverbial increments D, primarily P N and those containing .ly, are
transformable into the position of A and V members of W with sentential
subject:
SD t -+ Sn' occurs D t , Sn' is At
SDm -+ Sn is Am

Here D t indicates P Nor Aly of time and place, and At the corresponding
P N or A; occur stands for a set of synonymous verbs (take place, etc.); and
the tense of occur or be is the tense of the S (1ost in Sn'). Similarly for Dm
of manner.

TRANSFORMA TlONAL THEOR Y

253

He spoke there on Tuesday. His speaking there occurred on
Tuesday. His speaking there was on Tuesday.
He may break the toys frequently. His breaking the toys may
occur frequently.
His breaking the toys may be frequent.
He broke the toys vindictively. His breaking of the toys was
vindictive.

In addition, the Am of manner take a transformation like certain A members
of W: N's Ving Q is A -> N is A in Ving Q.
He was vindictive in breaking the toys.
He was vindictive in his (or: the) breaking of the toys.

Similarly, in W:
For him to do this is helpful; He is helpful to do this.

Among the transformations which involve only small subcategories of
words are these:
The zeroing of P in P N of measure: He ran for two hours -> He ran two
hours.
The repeating of the subject after certain U: He took a walk -> He took his
walk.
On W, there are the variants within the deformation of S as noted above.
Furthermore, every subcategory of W that occurs with Sn° has a transformation->Sn', and every W that occurs with Sn' has a transformation->
Sn:
I know that he signed the letter -> I know of his having signed the
letter -> I know of his signing of the letter.
Also, every sentence of the form Sn° V Q -> It V Q Sno:
That he came is odd -> It is odd that he came.

The various W on S are also transformable into the positions of D as
adjuncts on that S; e.g.
I know that he came -> He came, to my knowledge.
He came, as I know.
He came, I know.
That he came is clear -+ He came, clearly.

Given an S which is the object of a W, if the subject of the S is the same (in
referent) as the subject of the W (or as the ill of the W if the given W has
such an 01)' the subject of the operand S is zeroed (with various special
conditions):

254

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

I asked that I might come
-+ I asked to come.
I asked him that he should come -+ I asked him to come.

The transformations on connectives are of three main kinds: interchanges
among the connectives; zeroing of repeated or otherwise redundant material;
permuting of the second sentence.
The main interchange among connectives is that certain subordinate
conjunctions C. become conjunctional preposition Ps and in some cases
finally adverbs:
~ Cs Ving n
~
Cs Nt V n -+ ( Ps (N's) Ving n ~ -+ Vingly
while he smiled, while smiling, smilingly

There are also transformations between conjunctions and the binary verbs.
The zeroing occurs under different conditions for different conjunctions. In
C., V n is zeroed if identical with the V n of the first sentence; but it may be
zeroed in the first sentence if the second S with Cs precedes:
I will go if you will.
If you will go, I will.

In Cs and p. forms with -ing in the second sentence, the subject must or may
be zeroed (depending on the conjunction) if identical in referent with subject
or object of the first sentence:
I returned, after driving all night.

In coordinate conjunctions, words in the second sentence (under the conjunction) are zeroed if they are identical with the words in the corresponding string
position in the first sentence; but there are certain restrictions, and even certain
references to the position of the words in the underlying elementary sentences.
He bought books and she bought flowers

-+ He bought books and

she flowers.
He bought books and she too bought books -+ He bought books and
she too.

In comparative conjunctions, the zeroing is much like that of the coordinate
conjunctions, with some interesting differences.
In addition, there is zeroing of words in the second sentence which can be
determined (up to synonymity) from other words in it. This appears in the
zeroing of is (with zeroing of referent repeating subject) in

If he is free, he will go -+ Iffree, he will go.
lt appears in the zeroing of wh-word plus is in

TRANSFORMA TIONAL THE OR Y

255

The mountain which is very angular is the Matterhorn -+ The very
angular mountain is the Matterhorn.
It appears in more complicated ways in the zeroing of 'appropriate' V in
certain compound nouns, and in the zeroing of each other after reciprocal
verbs.
Cs S, in any of its transformations, can be permuted into any sentenceinsert position in the first sentence. Second sentences headed by coordinate or
comparative conjunctions can be permuted to a particular point in the first
sentence: the coordinate to immediately after the word which corresponds to
the last non-zeroed word under the conjunction (He and she too bought
books); the comparative to immediately after the word in the first sentence
which carried the comparative marker (A larger frame than we ordered has
arrived).

3.5. How the Transformations Operate
The pure unaries, the increments, and the binaries have been defined as
operations from elementary sentences to a resul tant sentence. The nonelementary unaries (§ 3.4) were defined on specific resultants, yielding a new
resultant. All of these can also operate on particular other sentence-structures
which have resulted from the prior operation of other transformations. To
see why this is possible, we note certain restrictions on the set of elementary
sentences and on the set of transformations, restrictions which will become
more apparent in the discussion of elementary transformations below. (1)
All elementary sentence-forms are similar to each other in certain features:
all consist of a subcategory of N plus t plus a subcategory of V plus an {1
structure determined by the V subcategory. (2) All transformations are
defined initially on one or some of the elementary sentence forms, or else on
the resultants of transformations which have been defined on elementary
sentence forms. (3) The resultant of a transformation differs from its
operand (and therefore from some elementary sentence form) by only certain
limited differences: either there has only been an insertion to the right or left
of one of the symbols of the form, or the subcategories which are the domains
of the symbols have been changed 28, or the order of symbols is no longer the
same as in one of the elementary sentence forms.
For an operation ({Jj' defined on elementary sentence forms, to operate also
on the resultant of an operation ({Ji> it is necessary only to extend the domain
of the argument of ({Jj so as to include the effects due to ({Jj. Thus, since the
passive operates on He began the smoking of cigars, i.e. on the resultant of
Ugr> we extend the definition of the passive to apply not only to the domains
of V and N z in the elementary sentence forms, but also to the new V sub-

256

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

category which includes begin and to the Vn (for all the elementary subcategories of V) as satisfying the N2 symbol. But since the passive does not
operate on He began to smoke cigars, i.e. on the resultant of VI' we do not
extend the domain of N z, as argument of the passive, to include to V; we
need not then specify here whether to V is or is not the n of begin, since we
are not defining the symbols absolutely, but only in respect to the various
transformations for which their domain has to be specified. And, since the
passive defined on N1 t V N2 fails to operate on the resultant of P-zeroing
before N of measure (see note 28), we say: N of measure is not included in
the elementary domain of N2 for V other than measure-verbs, so that the passive does not operate on sentences containing such N of measure as elementary sentences; and when we extend the definition of the passive, we do
not extend it to N of measure after nonmeasure V.
Transformations can therefore be defined as operations on elementary sentences and on the resultants of transformations. This in turn is equivalent to
defining transformations as operations on elementary sentences and on
transformations. When we extend the argument of a transformation to
include the effects of particular transformations, we are specifying which
transformations can follow upon which transformations, and so giving their
partial ordering. With their arguments defined in this way, the transformations need not be further ordered in respect to each other; although
when we give a transformational characterization of a particular sentence we
may have to specify a partial ordering among the transformations for that
particular resultant. Thus Smoking of cigars was begun by them is Passive of
Vg of They smoked cigars, while Cigars began to be smoked by them is Vg of
Passive of They smoked cigars. The question of which transformations can
repeat is also included in this specification of arguments.
When so specified, the transformations can be said to be able to occur
whenever the conditions of their argument (including the availability of any
necessary affixes for the particular words selected) are met. That is, every
sentence that can be formed by the defined transformations should be a
possible sentence, with an acceptability determined by the n-tuples and the
transformations. 29
The brief sketch above of the transformations of English and of their mode
of operation is thus a sketch of a transformational grammar of English.
Many problems remain concerning the precise domain of certain transformations, and whether certain relations among sentences satisfy the
criteria of being a transformation; and there are problems in the boundaries
between transformational structure and other features of language. However, a transformation once established is not normally falsifiable by further
research; and the existence of the transformational relation and the general

TRANSFORMA TIONAL THEOR Y

257

properties discussed below of the set of sentences under this relation, and of
the set of transformations, are not shaken by individual problems concerning
transformations.
4. THE SET OF SENTENCES UNDER TRANSFORMATIONS

When we describe the set of sentences in terms of the transformational relation, we have the following.
There is a family of elementary (axiomatic) sentence forms, the kernel of
the set of sentence forms under mapping onto the set of transformations.
The sequence of symbols Nt V 0. (0. = zero, N, N P N, etc. according to the
subtype of V) is the well-formedness requirement for the sentences of the
kernel. The well-formedness requirement for the other sentences, transformationally related to the kernel sentences, is the same, except that:
(1) Stated local inserts may appear to the left or right of stated symbols;
transformed sentences headed by wh, and by coordinate and comparative
conjunctions, may appear to the right of stated symbols (with zeroed wh- is;
also to the left); and sentence inserts, including sentences headed by subordinate conjunctions, may appear before or after any symbol of the kernel
sentence.
(2) The domain of V is extended to include the verbs of (a) Y, U and (b)
W30, with the domain (a) of 0. being correspondingly extended to include V
with various affixes (including to), and (b) of the subject N or the 0. (or, for
the binary verbs, both) being extended to include Sn° or Sn' or Sn.
(3) A sentence headed by a conjunction (or, more rarely, subject or object
of W) may have to have certain similarities or differences with respect to the
sentence to which it is being conjoined (or to the W under which it is), and
may (or in some cases must) have certain of its symbols satisfied by zero. In a
very few situations symbols of a sentence are satisfiable by zero when a
second sentence is conjoined to it in a particular way.
(4) Almost any word X of the elementary sentence, or else an adverbial
insert X on it, can appear as the value of the subject N (or object of the verb
be) when wh plus pronoun of X plus the rest of the elementary sentence
appears as the object of be (or the subject N): Nice is what he is, How he
speaks is quietly.
(S) A few permutations occur: of N t after certain D and under question
intonation; of 0. to the head of the sentence under question and contrastive
intonations.
(6) Satisfiers of N positions can be replaced by pronouns (including whpronouns under question intonation).
We thus have, for nonkerneI sentences, a secondary well-formedness

258

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

requirement derived from kernel well-formedness, and one which could as
well be expressed in string or other terms as in transformational terms. A
stronger composition rule specifies the nonkernel sentences transformationally in respect to the kernel sentences: Given a number of sentences in a
kernel form, which have among them a particular acceptability-ordering or
differentiation (not necessarily linear), all successions of transformations
which are permitted, by the definition of their argument, will produce
sentences preserving the same acceptability-ordering or differentiation.
These transformations therefore specify a decomposition of each derived
sentence into a kernel sentence, or if some of the transformations were
binary, into more than one kernel sentence. This decomposition can be used
to give each sentence of the language a normal form, which represents that
sentence as a set of kernel sentences with partially-ordered transformations
operating upon them (each transformation operating on one or on two
kernel sentences, or else on a transformation). Sentences which are grammatically ambiguous (i.e. homonymous) will have more than one normal
representation. 31
If a sequence of words (or of refined word subcategories) is not decomposable by transformations into one or more kernel sentences (or refined
kernel sentence forms), then that sequence is ungrammatical. If it is so
decomposable, then it has a certain kind and degree of acceptability as a
sentence, which is some kind of reasonable sum of the acceptabilities of the
component kernel sentences and the acceptability effects of the transformations which figure in the decomposition.
This decomposition, or normal form, is of special interest because of
various correlations with vocabulary, information-content, etc. The kernel
sentences are not only short and of simple form, but are also composed of a
restricted and simple vocabulary: mostly concrete nouns and verbs and
adjectives, and mostly unimorphemic words. Most morphologically derived
words are not in the kernel, because in almost all cases it is not that a word
takes on an affix of its own accord, in order to modify its meaning or change
its category; but rather a sentence changes its form by a transformation and
as part of the constants of this transformation some of the words take on
affixes. Thus boy-+boyhood appears in transformationally related sentences
like He was yet a boy, He was yet in his boyhood; theory-+theorize in such
transformationally related sentences as He made a theory about this, He
theorized about this. The kernel words are mostly concrete, because action
nouns, nouns of result, and many abstract nouns are in general nominalizations of sentences under Wand U operators (This item covered him
adequately, This item gave him adequate coverage), because many intellectual
and relational words are themselves W operators on a sentence (-is a fact,

TRANSFORMATIONAL THEORY

259

-is obvious, believe that-), because various words of aspect or mode of
action are U operators (try to-, begin to-), and so on. It can even be shown
that pronouns, numbers, most plurals, most occurrences of the 32, etc. can be
brought into the sentences by existing types of transformations, and need
not be taken as occurring in the kernel sentences.
In addition, there is a correlation of different parts of the normal form with
different kinds of selection (co-occurrence restrictions). The usual kind of
word-selection occurs in kernel n-tuples and between V and D (adverbial
inserts on verb). Between U operators and the operand kernel V there is in
some cases a weak selection; there is a dependence between certain Wor Cs
and the t of the kernel under them; and there is a restriction on the amount
and kind of difference between the two sentences joined by a connective.
In view of all this, it is clear that transformations provide not only a
possible grammatical analysis, but also one that is particularly subtle and
has various semantic correlations.
5. THE SET OF TRANSFORMATIONS

The interest of transformations for a theory of language structure would be
greater if the transformations of a language are not just a set of differences or
operations between sentences, but a set that has some coherent structure of
its own. The possibility of finding such a structure is heightened by the fact
that certain constants appear in various transformations (something which
itself would have to be explained): e.g. -ing in Y, U (He is buying books, He
began buying books, He began the buying of books) and W (His buying of the
books surprised me) and Cs (He left without buying the books). What is more,
in their various occurrences the constants are placed in similar ways in
respect to the kernel symbols and the other constants: e.g. by precedes the
original subject N and follows a nominalization or adjectivization of the
original V both in the Passive, The books were bought by him, and also under
W, The buying of the books by him surprised me. This suggests that these
constants are not merely local morphological affixes, but parts of a syntactic
(i.e. sentence-wide) activity with interrelated affixes over specified parts ofthe
kernel, which gives the kernel sentence a particular deformation as operand
of some operator or connective: e.g. the forms under Y, U, W, Cs.
Furthermore, when we see that the same constants appear in different kinds
of syntactic situation, e.g. by in the deformation under Wand in the unary
Passive, we can ask if one of these forms is the result of a transformation on
the other, so that the constant appears in the later form simply because it was
carried over from the earlier. Such an analysis would require that many
transformations which seem to be single, e.g. the Passive, are reaIIy the

260

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

resultants of some smaller transformation B operating on the resultant of
another, A - smaller, in the sense that only part of the passive form would be
due to B, the rest being due to the A on which B had operated. Since we have
thus entered upon the situation of successions of transformations, discussed
in § 3.5, it becomes relevant that the resultants of many transformations are
of only a few string forms (e.g. the resultant of some transformations is like a
kernel form; the resultant of the Sn deformations N's Ving of N, Ving of N
by N, under Wand p. is like N with right and left adjuncts); this makes it
easier for other transformations to operate on the resultants of the first.
We have thus reached the possibility of decomposing transformations into
component (divisor) transformations which we may call ELEMENTARY OPERATIONS. We try to carry this out in such a way that (if possible) every constant
is introduced by only one transformation (which must then be a divisor of
every resultant containing that constant), and in a way that yields a reasonable set of elementary operations and a derivation rule to obtain all transformations out of them. This turns out to be not entirely attainable for
English. The situation for English is as follows. Transformations have two
properties. One, they distribute certain changes over specified parts of a
sentence form A. Two, the result is a sentence form B, and the acceptabilityordering for the n-tuples of A is preserved in B. The optimal divisors into
which we can break up the transformations of English fall just short of these
properties in the following way.
There are a few divisors whose resultant or operand is not quite acceptable
as a sentence, or is a deformation of a sentence (type 3 below), but such that
the next divisor operating on it yields an acceptable sentence. Thus the
question-answer pair What does he do? He draws cartoons can be analyzed in
the same way as What does he draw? He draws cartoons and Who draws
cartoons? He draws cartoons only by relating What does he do? to He does
drawing of cartoons and then the latter to He draws cartoons. In this way we
can reach a set of elementary transformational divisors which have the
following property: every transformation of the language is either one of
these divisors or else a particular succession of them. Except for divisors of
type 3 below, those resultants of a divisor which, for many n-tuples, are not
acceptable as sentences are nevertheless acceptable for certain n-tuples or
in the presence of certain kinds of adjuncts. Thus He does drawing of cartoons
may be barely acceptable; He did smoking of cigars (between What did he do?
and He smoked cigars) is rather unacceptable; but He does teaching is
acceptable.
5.1. The Elementary Transformations

The elementary (axiomatic) operations (in a few cases, nonindependent

TRANSFORMA TIONAL THEOR Y

261

divisors) into which the transformations of English can be decomposed turn
out to be a rather reasonable set:
(1) Local and sentential inserts and adverbial inserts, which do not affect
the syntactic status (i.e. the subjectability to transformations) of the sentence
parts to which they are adjoined.
(2) Operators Y, U, W on verb and on sentence, which introduce a new
verb, with the original Vor sentence being deformed as object or subject
of it.
(3) Connectives, which head a sentence and may require a deformation of
it, after which the connective-headed sentence is inserted into another
sentence by the first operation above. 33
(4) The zeroing of redundant material. Whereas the three transformational
divisors listed above were all increments, this fourth one drops words from a
sentence, but only words whose presence can be reconstructed from the
environment. Hence we can say that the material is still morphemically
present, that only its phonemes become zero, and that the language therefore
has no dropping of morphemes. Nevertheless, this zeroing is real enough to
be a transformational divisor in the derivation rule for transformations
(§ 5.3).
5.2. Zeroing of Redundant Material

Since this operation is not easy to observe, a more detailed study of it will be
given here.
Zeroing eliminates, from (usually) secondary members of a sequence of K
and W, such words Z as can be determined (up to local synonymity 34) from
the particular words which occupy certain positions in the sequence distinguished relative to Z. Z therefore carries no information in the given
sentence.
In all cases, what is removed is a redundancy that has arisen out of the
juxtaposing of a kernel sentence K with an operator or insert, or with
another K (or a disjunction or conjunction of K). Removal of redundancy is
carried out in a way that leaves the resultant similar to some K form. The
sentences which lack a word, because of a redundancy removal, have
structures of the same kind as sentences without redundancy removal: e.g.
He denied his having slept, He denied having slept (where the Q loses a word,
but remains Q). This is so because most redundancy removal is in those parts
of a sentence which have the form of an insert (e.g. the his above, which is
like an insert in the Q), or in a limited way in the Q of the sentence.
The material that is zeroed in English is mainly 'appropriate' words
(§ 5.21), repetitive words (§ 5.22), and indefinite pronouns (resulting from
disjunctions or conjunctions of sentences, § 5.23).

262

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

5.21. Appropriate Words
The first type of redundancy remo.val operates in an insert or a secondary
K, i.e. a C K, or a K that is under an operator. To consider the actual forms,
it will be helpful first to define 'appropriate X', X ap; X here ranges over the
relation-expressing categories V, P, the operator W, and perhaps classifiernouns Nel • The Xap of a particular word in a structure is the member (or
members) of X which is the main co-occurrent of that word in that structure,
for the given subject matter. That is, X ap , in a K or insert or operator, is a
particular member of category X which in the given culture or subject matter
(e.g. conversation or science) is accepted (understood) as the main word to
occur with the particular other words of that K or insert or operator, or with
the particular word to which the K or insert is adjoined. In a form Ai Xap Bj,
the Xap means not its full dictionary meaning but that which primarily
carries out the X-relation (e.g. verb-relation) of AI to BI (in the present
discourse).35 Several words of category X may equally satisfy A i X ap B i ; they
are then locally synonymous in respect to Ai'" Bi.
In many circumstances, specified below, the Xap can be eliminated; other
members of X cannot. There is no loss of information, for the absence of the
X which is required in the A X B structure (whose presence is evidenced by
the remaining A B), points to the Xap which is determined (up to local
synonymity) by the individual words of the Ai B i. Thus from violin-prodigy
we generally reconstruct violin-playing prodigy, and from violin-merchant we
generally reconstruct violin-selling merchant. In any case, the grammatical
reality of Xap lies in the fact that it and not other X can be zeroed in this way
(or that Xap is the only X that occurs in the given position). This treatment
enables us to relate in a simple and reasonable way such aberrant forms A B
(e.g. compound nouns N-N) with grammatically regular form A X B.36
5.211. Conditions for dropping v,'P' The chief environmentally determined
redundancy is in p and the related is Pap, which may be dropped when it occurs in an insert, or in the subject or n of the operator. Thus many compound
nouns of the form N 2 -Nl are derived as follows:

v..

e.g.
the milkman
+-*the milk-delivering man
+- The man delivers milk connected by wh to man in some other S.

Similarly, when NI is Pap N2 is connected by wh to N I , we obtain N 2-NI : He
painted the clothes-closet+-wh [He painted the closet. The closet isfor clothes]
(or The closet contains clothes, or the like).
Under an operator, when the K or its V is deformed, with N V -+ Ving of N

TRANSFORMATIONAL THEORY

263

(Brecht wrote-+writings of Brecht) and V N-+to V N (to study French), the
Ving and to V can be dropped if V is V8p'37
The writings of Brecht make good reading -+ Brecht makes good
reading.
-+ I began French.
I began to study French
To hear would not drop in I began to hear French.
I began to read the book -+ I began the book.
I began to write the book -+ I began the book.

But to buy does not drop in I began to buy the book. The appropriateness may
also be determined by the operator, as in The storm (crash, noise, etc.) caused
the damage (+-the occurrence of the storm ... etc.). In contrast, in The ending of
the storm caused the damage, The brevity of the storm caused the damage, the
words the ending of, the brevity of would not drop.38
Similarly, When do you expect him to come? (or to arrive etc.)-+ When do
you expect him?; but in When do you expect him to speak? (or to leave), the to
V, not being to p for the operator expect, does not drop.39
Much investigation is still needed in the question of Xap , since careful
justification is necessary before absent words are reconstructed. Evidence of a
dropped p is particularly clear when a plural subject has a singular verb:
Too many cooks spoils the broth+-Having (or The action of) too many cooks
spoils the broth (the common form Too many cooks spoil the broth is not
understandable literally); Two apparently opposed parties is the answer+Having ... As another example, consider a word which must be followed
(when in category P) by a Nt of time, or (when in category Ps ) by Sn, but
which appears followed by N not of time: It's the best bargain since Manhattan+- ... since the purchase of Manhattan. 40
A case of nap is each other as n of reciprocal V. The reciprocal V (for
which Nt V N2+-+N2 V Nt: She met him, He met her) do not occur without n
except as a result of a dropped n=each other: He and she met+-He and she
met each other; while Tom and Jim argued+-Tom and Jim argued with each
other, or+-Tom argued and Jim argued. But in nonreciprocal V, the each
other does not drop: He and she dislike each other.
5.212. Dropping of constants. The dropping of words which are constants
of certain forms can be taken as a grammatical parallel to the dropping of
Xap: the constants areXap of the forms. In certain insert and object forms of
those Kwhose Vis be (or has been reduced to be), the be is dropped. In the
people here+-the people who are here we have the wh word plus tense plus be
dropped from the insert who are here, whereas another V in this position would
not be dropped: the people who ate here-t-+the people here. When a Kwhose V

v..

v..

264

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

is be becomes the object of certain Woperators or of certain p., the be, to be,
or being may be dropped: They left him angry but They left himfeeling il/ 41 ;
While ill, he thought of it, but While delivering milk, he thought of it.
The dropping of a constant in a particular form gives rise to one of the
most common transformations, namely the sharing transformation which
takes two K that contain identical Ni and makes the residue of the second K
into an adjective or other insert to the Ni in the first K. We start with Kl wh
K 2, in which K2 necessarily contains an Ni which also occurs in K 1 • K2 is
permuted so that Ni is its first part. The Ni at the head of the K2 is replaced
by a pronoun which becomes the second part of the wh-word: I picked up the
book which fell. The wh-word (i.e. wh plus pronoun) may be replaced by
that, which carries less information than who or which, since it does not
specify the subcategory of Ni (something which however can be discovered
from the Ni itself immediately preceding). Furthermore, in all cases where the
constant, whether wh-word or that, is not followed by the verb K 2 , the whword or that may be dropped: I picked up the book which you dropped, I
picked up the book you dropped.
Here an additional use of the redundancy-removal operation comes into
play: If the verb following the wh-word is the constant be (or certain Ud
operators like do in He does writing), or v"p, then both the wh-word and the
V-constant or v"p of K2 may be dropped:
I described the tree which was nearby ~
I described the tree nearby.

We thus obtain the very frequent and important situation of wh-Iess K2
inserts on N, including the one-word left (and right) adjuncts of N: I saw the
people present from I saw the people who (that) were present, I saw the new
book from I saw the book which (that) was new, I saw the milkman from I saw
the man who (that) delivers milk (or brings or sells milk). 42
5.213. Dropping of performative operators. Related to the dropping of
predictable material is the dropping of certain sentence-operators which have
performative force (so that no information loss results from dropping them)
and whose existence is indicated by characteristic intonations in the K on
which they had operated. This is the case in English for the question and the
imperative. As can be shown, all questions (both yes-no and wh-) are
obtainable in a simple way, and without appeal to special transformations,
from a particular Woperator on a disjunction of S:
I ask if S1 or Sz ... or So

where the or S2 ... or So can be promorphemed into a droppable or not, with
if ~ whether:

TRANSFORMATIONAL THEORY

265

I ask whether Sl (or not)
e.g. I ask whether he will go (or not) ~ I ask: Will he go (or not) ? ~ Will he
go? If in the disjunction only one word, say the object, varies, we have:
I ask if he will take the pen or he will take the pencil ... or he will
take the brush.
~ I ask whether he will take the pen or the pencil ... or the brush.
~ I ask what he will take.
~I ask: What will he take?43~ What will he take?
Similarly, we obtain the imperative from:
I request (order, etc.) you that you (please) take it.
~ I request (order, etc.) you: (Please) take it.
~ (Please) take it!
In each case, the deformed operand with its intonation is unique to the
particular W; therefore the W is zeroable.
Similar considerations apply to quoted material. Thus we can derive:
'Long' contains four letters.
+- The word' long' contains four letters.
+- wh [The word contains four letters, The word is 'long']
with
The word is 'long '.
+- 'Long' is a word.
+- Long is a word.
where the quotes are a unique transformation for the subjects of the kernel
sentences X is a word, X is a term, etc.
In such ways we can eliminate the moods, quotes, etc. from the kernel, and
show that they are not independent meaning-carrying operations but simply
variants occurring under unique operators or kernel-words (such as word).
Furthermore, Will he go? is then directly transformed not from He will go
but from I ask whether he will go; and 'Long' contains four letters is not
transformed from Long containsfour letters but from The word 'long' contains
four letters (with source noted above).
It is possible also to say that any sentence S may be derived from its
occurrence under droppable operators which leave it unchanged. Thus in
Someone says that S. ~ Someone says: S.
the conditions of § 5.213 would permit the dropping of the operator, leaving
S. Similarly, since an informationless operator which can occur on all S

266

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

would be droppable by § 5.213, we could say that any S occurrence may be
derived from its occurrence under such an operator. In particular, we could
think of cycles consisting of the adding of such an operator and its zeroing:
He returned.
plus operator: ~ His returning occurred.
zeroing:
~ He returned.

As was noted near the beginning of § 3.4, in these forms the tense (and
auxiliaries) moves to the operator when the tenseless Sn' is formed. This
situation enables us to explain the difference between He may return in the
sense of his volition and He may return in the sense oflikelihood. The first is:
He returns.
plus may: ~ He may return.

The second is:
He
returns.
~ His returning occurs.
plus operator:
~ His returning may occur.
plus may:
zeroing of operator: ~ He may return.

The difference between the two meanings is then due not to the meaning
range of may but to a difference in transformations.
5.22. Repetitive Material
The second type of redundancy removal also operates only in secondary
K, and permits or requires the dropping of a word (with certain appended
constants, if they are present) if the same word precedes (rarely, follows) it,
as antecedent, in a distinguished position of its primary K1 or ofthe operator
on the K.
The simplest case is in K1 wh K 2 , where the common N immediately
following the wh is pronouned and becomes the second part of the wh-word.
A repetitive subject (if it has been transformed into the form of an insert)
or adverbial P N (but not normally Q) is zeroed under W, Ps • Thus when
certain W with Nj subject (or (1) operate on a K whose subject is Nj , the
second Nj drops if it is in insert-form: in I prefer that I should go first there is
no zeroing, but in the transform of this I prefer for me to go first~ I prefer to
go first. Similarly I insist that I should go, I insist on my going~I insist on
going. Similarly, I told him to go+- I told him that he should go; but there is no
zeroing in I told him that she should go, I told him that he was wrong. There
are other operators (e.g. oppose) after which the zero before Ving (e.g. I
oppose smoking) is of type § 5.23 below.

TRANSFORMATIONAL THEORY

267

Several conditions for zeroing a referent-repeating subject are found in
S2n after certain Ps. Thus: He stopped after entering+-He stopped after his
entering (or: entry); since after is also Cs, we also have He stopped after he
entered. After while, we have (as Cs) He stopped while he spoke and (as Ps)
He stopped while speaking, but the intermediate is lacking: '" 3 He stopped
while his speaking. Zeroing of the subject of S2n is the same whether the
antecedent is the subject of S1, as above, or the n of S1, as in He stopped her
after (her) entering. In many situations, therefore, the zeroed subject is
ambiguous as to antecedent: He caught them while leaving the hall.

A different kind of zeroing of repeated words is found after the coordinate
and comparative connectives and C., as was seen in § 3.4.
The answer after a question, and the question after an assertion, may zero
the V n, or the whole sentence except for the answering or questioning word:
I will go. You will?, What will he get? A book. 44
5.23. Zeroing of Indefinite Pronouns

The third type of redundancy operation permits the pronouning (or, in
certain cases, dropping) of disjunctions (more rarely, conjunctions) of all the
words in a category or subcategory. These disjunctions of words come from
disjunctions of elementary sentences. If n is the number of words in subcategory N, we have:
N1 or N2 ... or Nn Vi n l
+- N1 ~ n i or N2 ... or N n
+- N1 ~ n i or N2 ~ n i ... or N n Vi n i •
I or you ... or she will go.
I will go, or you, ... or she.
I will go or you will go ... or she will go.

In a variety of positions, such disjunctions of N are pronouned. They are
zeroed only in insert-forms, and in n and before wh-insert. When this
zeroing occurs, we may say that the disjunction is first replaced by an
indefinite pronoun, and that this pronoun is then zeroed. 45 No loss of
information results from such zeroing, since the disjunction could carry no
information (beyond the grammatical presence of the category, which
remains evident from the environing residual structure).
Dropping of insert-form indefinite pronouns (e.g. someone's, by someone)
is seen when secondary K receive the form of adjectives or P N, and may be
dropped, with a meaning equivalent to the indefinite pronoun of subject and
n. Thus
The place has been taken.
+- The place has been taken by someone.

268

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS
+- The place has been taken by N1 , or by N z ... or by N n •

+- The place has been taken by Nt ... or the place has been taken

byNn•
+- Nl took the place ... or N n took the place. 46

Under certain sentence-operators, the insert-form subject of the operand K
is zeroed when it is an indefinite pronoun, rather than when it is identical
with the subject or n 1 of the operator.
He opposes drinking. +- He opposes anyone's drinking.
He says to wait. +- He says for people to wait.
The job requires having patience. +- The job requires one's having
patience.

The same is the case for
To find the book is important.
+- For someone to find the book is important.

When this subject of the K is not in insert form, the disjunction is pronouned
but not zeroed:
The job requires that one have patience.

Other types of disjunction-zeroing take place in certain particular noninsert positions.
The most widespread of these is the zeroing of indefinite object, which
occurs with many but not all V: He reads+-He reads something+-He reads Nl
or N z ... or No.47 That this n-zeroing is indeed of the disjunction of objects
for the given V, and not of a single n, is supported by the fact that metaphorical and idiomatic objects are not pronounable or zeroable: the idiomatic
sense of If I know how to read the signs correctly is not preserved in If I
know how to read correctly.
There is also a situation in which, given an indefinite pronoun 48 which
carries a wh-insert, the pronoun is dropped, leaving the insert to carry the
grammatical relations of the N (or, we might say, leaving a zero N whose
presence is recognized from the insert).49 This is the case of forms like
I read what he wrote.
+-1 read that (or: the things) which he wrote.
+-1 read Nl which he wrote and N z which he wrote ... and Nn
which he wrote.

That we indeed have here a zero N, invisible as to phonemes but tangible
morphemically, is supported by the fact that certain transformations which

TRANSFORMA TIONAL THEOR Y

269

operate on wh-forms do not operate on those wh-forms which are merely
inserts to a zeroed N. Thus, the transformation W, as in:
Sn° Vn-+It

vn Sno

operates not only on Sn° under W, as in:
What he will say is not known. -+ It is not known what he will say.
Who will come doesn't interest me. -+ It doesn't interest me who
will come.

but also on the extraction form of K (with that in place of what) 50:
wh Ni S-Ni is Ni -+ It is Ni that S-Ni
What he needs is money. -+ It is money that he needs.
(*) Who said so was John himself. -+ It was John himself who said
so.

However, the transformation does not operate on
What he wrote was (widely) read.

"" 3 It was (widely) read what he wrote. 51
even though the subject is of the same form as in the extraction. This is so
because the subject here has zero N:
What he wrote was (widely) read. +- That which he wrote was
(widely) read.

with that zeroed, but morphemically present. Indeed, when the pronoun is
human, it is usually not zeroed:
The one whom they opposed was voted down.
5.3. The Derivation Rule on the Elementary Operations

We can now return to the four axiomatic transformational divisors, i.e. the
elementary operations of § 5.1, and attempt a rule of derivation which
specifies almost all transformations 52 on the basis of them.
Consider two sentence forms A, B, each containing some subcategory X
and therefore written A (X), B(X). If between A (X) and B(X) there holds
some succession of the elementary operations, then given the corresponding
form A (X') containing a subcategory X' similar to X, there is a possibility of
finding B of X':
A (X)+-+ B (X)
A (X')
B(X/).

270

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

It should be understood that while B (X') is a transform of A (X'), it is not derived from A (X') by a transformation, but is derived from the above rule.
Derivation is therefore to be taken in the sense of this rule, and is not identical with transformation in its definition.
The above is an analogic rule of a form relevant to linguistic change. 53 It is
of a tenuous character, because we cannot specify what similarities are
sufficient for this rule to operate, and what is the likelihood that the extension
of the A (X)-R(X) relation to A (X') will indeed have much acceptability.
These matters require investigation, although a complete specification of
these two conditions is not be be expected, if the development of language is
not internally determinate. Nevertheless, a reasonable interpretation of the
similarity conditions for X, X' suffices to characterize the transformations of
English from the four (or, with note 52, five) types of elementary operation
by means of this rule.
If the relation in the major premise is A ~ R defined on X, in the sense that
R(X) is derivable from A (X) by one or more of the operations, then R(X')
looks like an extension of the argument of these operations to include X' as
well as X. E.g. the transformation on Woperators
Sn° Vn~It vn Sn°

is extended to operate on sentences of the extraction form (2) wh- S is X as
well as on (1) Sn° V n. The Sn° V n itself includes wh- S is A, wh- S is N:
Whether he took it is unclear, Whether he took it is the question, What he took
is the question, Who took it is the question, etc. The sentences of the form (2)
wh- S is X constitute an important set of sentences, pronouning at the head of
S an X whose range is N, P N, Ving n, D, and certain n including A: What
he took is a book, Who said so is John, Where he stayed was with me, How he
argued was quietly, What he is is clever. Although these are very different
from (1) Sn° vn in range and in grammatical character, there are a number
of structures in (1) and (2) which are similar, as sequences of symbols, i.e. of
constants and categories. We thus find the It form (with that replacing the
wh-words except for who and rarely when, where), yielding It is X that S-X: It
is a book that he took, It is John who said so, It was clearly that he argued, etc. 54
We could have said from the start that the It transformation operates on
both structures. However, since the extraction (2) has a complicated derivation we can describe the application to it of the It transformation as a
separate step, derived from It on W operators.
If the relation is A+-B defined on X, the deriving of B(X') looks like an inverse transformation from A (X'). Thus, we can zero a repetitive subject
under W:
(1)

We prefer our studying French. ~ We prefer studying French.

TRANSFORMA TIONAL THEOR Y

271

while in the parallel We prefer her studying French there is no zeroing. Now
given sentences under U:
(2)

We began studying French (last year).
We had thoughts about it.

we derive
(3)

We began our studying French (last year).
We had our thoughts about it.

The two-subject form (3) cannot be the source of the one-subject form (2),
since there are no two independent subjects in (3): ",:3 We had their thoughts
about it, and U is defined as not introducing a second subject. Hence we can
only understand (3) as obtained from (2) as an extension of (1).
If the transformational relation between A and B on X is not a single
divisor, the formation of B(X') makes the A-B difference look like a single
operation from A (X'), even if such a transformation does not exist. Thus, if
we start first with certain U, as in
He laughed-+He gave a laugh; He had a laugh

we have a transformational relation between He gave a laugh and He had a
laugh even though no elementary operation takes us from one to the other
(and indeed the only succession of elementary operations that would take us
from one to the other would be the inverse of a member of U: He gave a
laugh-+He laughed followed by another member of U: He laughed-+He had
a laugh). Given now
He had a party

we extend the transformational relation above, which had been defined on
Vn, to such N (like party) as are the Q of sets of U-like members of V; in this
way we can obtain
He gave a party

(or vice versa), even though no verb partied exists to connect these two by
elementary operations. This yields derived transformation directly from one
U-like V to another, before certain N.
A surprising result is that many transformational shapes of a sentence are
best obtainable from the elementary operations by going through the W
operators. This is so because many of these transforms are virtually identical
with the Sn under W, except that the sentential form has is. Thus the Sn
forms of They purchased the gouaches under a W include:

272
(1)

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMA TIONAL LINGUISTICS

We reported their purchase of gouaches (or: their purchasing)
We reported the purchase of the gouaches by them
We reported the purchase by them of the gouaches
We reported their gouache-purchase.

Consider now a sentence beginning with N is under the wh-connective, with
excision of wh- is (§ 5.212):
(2)
(3)

He tore a picture; The picture was on the wall ~
He tore the picture which was on the wall ~
He tore the picture on the wall.

Since all Sn have the morphological form of N with adjuncts, the set (1) is
similar to (3) except for subcategory: both consist of Nl plus t V plus N z with
adjuncts. We therefore form from the set (1), on the analogy of the difference
between (3) and (2), i.e. by the inverse of wh- is excision and of wh connective:
We reported the purchase. Their purchase was of the gouaches.
(or: The purchase of the gouaches was theirs.)
We reported the purchase. The purchase of the gouaches was by
them (or: The purchasing .. .)
We reported the purchase. The purchase by them was of the
gouaches.
We reported the purchase. The gouache-purchase was theirs.

And so for all Sn-forms, although some of these new sentence forms have low
acceptability. Such derivations can yield the sentence modulations, as in The
purchase of gouaches was theirs.
In addition to these directly derivable forms, there are transformational
forms which show further operations upon these derivations. Thus, starting
from
The purchasing by them was of gouaches
we may be able to obtain, by transformational steps similar to mirroring
(§ 3. I) and a be Va P type of U (§ 3.2), the passive:
Gouaches were purchased by them

This derivation is particularly uncertain because the intermediate steps are
similar but not identical to the known forms of mirroring and U. Nevertheless, the relation of the passive to the Sn noted above is supported by the
following similarities. In both, the original subject takes by and becomes
appended after the deverbalized V. Both reject the same pseudo-objects:
From The champion ran a mile, The candidate spoke two hours:

TRANSFORMA TIONAL THEOR Y

273

(They reported) the running of a mile by the champion.
A mile was run by the champion.
~ 3 (They reported) the speaking of two hours by the candidate.
~ 3 Two hours were spoken by the candidate.

And neither applies if V = be or verbs of the be-set (seem, become). There is
no Passive of He was sick, He seemed sick, and
~ 3 They reported the being sick by him.
~ 3 They reported the seeming sick by him.

As a somewhat different case, consider a peculiar English sentence form,
whose character can be explained only by some kind of derivation from W.
This is the form containing is to: The bomb is to go off at three. On the one
hand, such sentences are peculiar in that no auxiliaries can be added: ~ 3
The bomb will be to go off at three. On the other hand, each is to sentence
carries the meaning of intention or of arranging for an outcome, even though
the intender does not appear in the sentence. Now if we consider the W
operators which take the form
(1)
(2)

Nt V (P) Ni that Ni should V n-+
N t V Nj to V n,

we find that they have a characteristic meaning of arranging the V n for the
N j : They set the bomb that it should go offat three-+ They set the bomb to go off
at three , He fixed the show to open abroad, etc. If on (2) we carry out successively the inverse of wh- is excision and the inverse of the wh connective,

we obtain:

Nt V N j to V n -+
Nt V Nj wh Ni is to V n-+
N t V Ni . Ni is to V n.
He set the bomb to go off at three-+
He set the bomb, which is to go off at three-+
He set the bomb. The bomb is to go off at three.

The form (2) is formed only out of (1) containing in its operand K the
auxiliary should to which of course no further auxiliary can be added. The to
(2) is a morphophonemic shape of this auxiliary should (in particular, should
in the sense which it has in the operand of set, arrange) under certain operators, i.e. in certain new (insert-like) environments. The K-like form which
the inverses produce out of (2) merely adds the V-constant be to this to.
Hence no auxiliaries can be added to is to, and the meaning of the source
arrange that N should is retained in N is to.

274

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

A remark on the direction of derivation: The great similarity between
these sentence forms and Sn under W makes it clear that one should be
derived from the other. One might think of deriving the Sn from the independent S forms, by saying that we could go in the opposite direction, and
obtain the Sn by wh-connective between such sentences as We reported the
purchase, They set the bomb (instead of the Woperators) and these new S
forms. However, since the same verbs report, set, etc. appear also as undoubted Woperators on that they purchased, that the bomb should go off(and
each with different Sn° deformations of the operand S, at that), we would
have to have the W operators in S anyhow, and it is far simpler to have a
single transformation Sn°-+Sn, and then the new S forms from the Sn.
If we now make a quick check of the unaries in § 3.1, we find that they are
all either successions of the elementary operations or else derivable from
them by the rule of § 5.3, and so for the unaries of § 3.5. Thus the asyntactic
require the fifth operation (note 52). The pleonastic N's is the inverse of the
repetition zeroing under W. Pronouning can be considered a process like
zeroing, but not simply a stage toward it, since the conditions for the two
differ in important respects (see note 44). The derivation of the modulations
and the passive have been discussed above. The middle can be obtained via
S-+Sn is Am followed by an inverse:

He fitted the door snugly
-+ His fitting of the door was snug
-+ The fitting of the door was snug
-+ The door fitted snugly
the last being the inverse of the same S-+Sn is Am transformation on intransitive V, as in The chirping of the birds was cheery+-The birds chirped
cheerily.

6. THE SET OF SENTENCES UNDER THE ELEMENTARY OPERATIONS
When we consider the set of sentences under the elementary operations we
find a new situation. In the case of the set of sentences under transformations
(§ 4), we saw that if two sentences were related, it was always possible to state
a transformation or succession of these from one to the other. Because of the
nature of the derivation rule on the elementary operations, we now have sentences which are related to each other in the theory of elementary operations,
without one being derived from the other by any succession of elementary
operations (as in the interchange of U, § 5.3). What does hold between any
two related sentences, however, is that the difference between them is always
a sum of elementary differences, where an elementary difference is the

TRANSFORMATIONAL THEOR Y

275

difference between the operand and resultant of an elementary operation.
We might therefore reach an analysis of sentences as a sum of elementary
sentences and elementary differences; in some cases the order of accumulating
the differences is nonunique, though the problem of alternative ways of
deriving a form may become complicated only where certain inverses are
involved.
NOTES
• The details of transformational analysis which the present paper summarizes have appeared or are to appear in various issues of Trans/ormations and Discourse Analysis Papers,
Department of Linguistics, University of Pennsylvania, and of Papers on Formal Linguistics, Mouton & Co., The Hague. I wish to thank Henry Hii: for valuable criticisms of
the present manuscript.
1 This is a simplified statement, omitting various restrictive conditions.
2 The immediate-constituent analysis would give:
Subject: a sample which a young naturalist can obtain directly
Predicate: is often o/value,
with a sample and is and o/value eventually appearing as heads. The existence of a sentence
A sample is 0/ value, and its relation to the analyzed sentence, are not expressed by the
constituent analysis.
3 A distinction should also be made here between hierarchical operations and simple
classification. The fact that some strings are partially similar, or that some strings occur
in the same positions, may be expressed by collecting these strings into a class or schema.
This serves only for an abbreviation of a linguistic description that could be made without
such classification, so that there is no hierarchical linguistic operation here.
4 This is not to say that there are no further subtleties of sentence structure which have
yet to be treated. There remain problems concerning morphological and other restrictions
on the application of transformations, concerning quasi-idiomatic constructions, concerning classifier-relations between words, etc.
6 The pitting of one linguistic tool against another has in it something of the absolutist
postwar temper of social institutions, but is not required by the character and range of
these tools of analysis.
6 The complete statement is a bit more complicated, because certain sentences have a
string structure different from the one shown here (though closely related to it); e.g. This I
like. Correspondingly, certain transformations produce or act upon these other string
structures. The actual transformations of a language are of course a small subset of the
ones admitted by the above statement, a subset distinguished by certain additional string
restrictions and by the essential transformational properties described below in this paper.
7 Because of the mass of idiomatic and quasi-idiomatic expressions in language, each
type of description has to treat of various special small categories of words, and in some
cases even of unique words. But in the case of string and transformational analyses, and
less adequately in the case of constituent analysis, the statements for aberrant and idiomatic material can be made in the terms of the given description (constituent, string, or
transformation) or in limited extension or weakenings of the rules of that description. In
these analyses, the treatment of difficult material does not require us to go completely
outside the terms of the given description into the terms of another or into the metalanguage.
8 A program for string analysis by computer exists, and a transformational program has
been designed. A transformational program can utilize in part the results of a string analysis. The less detailed program which analyzed sentences on the Univac in 1959 used a
combination of string analysis and constituent analysis.

276
9 This

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

applies, for example, to the formulation of grammar in terms of partially ordered
homomorphisms which was sketched in Z. S. Harris, 'From Morpheme to Utterance', Lg.
22 (1946), 161-83 (paper 4 of this volume) and which has been given an explicit form in
Noam Chomsky's rewriting rules; also to the precise theory of generative grammar
proposed and formulated by Chomsky in a series of major papers, especially in his Syntactic Structures, The Hague 1957. Cf. also his interesting 'Three Models for the Description of Language', IRE Transactions on Information Theory, IT-2 (1956).
10 This formulation has to be extended, as it readily can be, to two further cases: where
the second sentence form lacks one of the word categories (due to zeroing); and where we
start with two sentence forms, Al and As, each with its own scale ofsatisfiers, plus a connective, and compare with a sentence form B containing the word categories of both (or at
least, allowing for zeroing, the word categories of one form) where the acceptability-order
of the n-tuples of B is summed in some regular way (related to the connective) from the
acceptability-order of the corresponding n-tuples of Al and As. This criterion of a preserved acceptability-ordering is not easy to investigate and use. However, it clearly holds
for all the pairs of satisfier-sets X, Y, where we would clearly want a transformational
relation between X and Y. And if we find n-tuples which satisfy one form (with satisfiers
X) with different acceptability-ordering than when they satisfy another form (with satisfiers Y), we indeed do not wish to call Ya transform of X, e.g. we may hesitate to consider
the use of the passive form in scientific writing as a passive transform of the active.
11 Such extension of a type of analysis into parts of the language where the analysis could
not have been independently established does not make the analysis arbitrary. The existence of the relation in question has already been established over a large part of the language. Once we have seen, in this large part of the language, what are the effects of this relation, we may be able to show that similar effects exist in the rest of the language and
may be attributed to the same relation.
12 One might say Can Helen Keller see a person with her fingers?, but the acceptability
would be rather special, and even more so for a simple Did Helen Keller see John? There
is also Can Helen Keller 'see' a person with her fingers?; but this can be derived, by a transformation that produces quotation, from something like Can Helen Keller do something
which is called seeing a person with her fingers?
13 One might propose, as such a property: personal names used purely as examples for
this discussion, and not identified with any real or fictional person. But such n-tuples have
no acceptability difference among them in any sentence-form, so that they do not provide
a basis for saying that (9)-(10).
14 Note in particular the formulations proposed by Henry Hiz in 'Congrammaticality,
Batteries of Transformations, and Grammatical Categories', in Proceedings of Symposia in
Applied Mathematics, vol. 12, American Mathematical Society 1961; also in his 'The Role
of Paraphrase in Grammar', Monograph Series on Languages and Linguistics, vol. 17 (1964).
The definition of transformation can also be adjusted for various purposes. Starting with
transformations defined as an equivalence relation between satisfier-sets (the X and Y
above), we can speak of transformations between sentences (corresponding members of
these sets) or between sentence forms (for certain n-tuples satisfying them). In a different
way, we can speak of transformations operating on sentences, or operating on elementary
sentences and on transformations (§ 3.5 below).
15 This holds also for the transformations as they appear in the theory of Noam Chomsky
and in the applications by his students, even though in this case they are set up formally
not as a relation between sentences but as instructions in the course of generating sentences (from already-generated simpler sentences). See Noam Chomsky, 'A Transformational Approach to Syntax', in A. A. Hill (ed.), Proceedings of the Third Texas Conference
on Problems of Linguistic Analysis in English. 1958 1962, 124-58, reprinted in J. A. Fodor
and J. J. Katz (eds.), The Structure of Language, 1964.
18 Acceptability-difference is a refinement of the criterion of co-occurrence, which had
been used in the original presentation of transformations in Z. S. Harris, 'Distributional
Structure', Word 10 (1954), 146-62 (Paper I of this volume); 'Co-occurrence and Trans-

TRANSFORMATIONAL THEORY

277

formation in Linguistic Structure', Lg. 33 (1957), 283-340 (Paper 8 of this volume).
The criterion of co-occurrence presented difficulties, because it is doubtful if we can
say that a certain n-tuple does not occur at all in a given sentence form. A more important reason for seeking a refinement on co-occurrence is that transformation preserves
not only the occurrability of n-tuples but also the degree to which they can occur and the
sense and nuance with which they occur. See end of note 10.
17 The specific lists for English, on which the present commentary draws, are given in
various papers, from Z. S. Harris, 'Discourse Analysis'. Lg. 28 (1952), 1-30, § 7.3 (Paper
7 of this volume), and through various issues of the Transformations and Discourse
Analysis Papers. In the following discussion, the terminology of operations and the
symbol -+wiII often be used instead of the terminology of (equivalence) relations and the
symbol +-+. This is only because once we have a transformational relation between forms A
and B, it is convenient (in order to define a useful set of base transformations, § 5) to develop
a formulation in which B is obtained from A by an operation. with A being the simpler or
descriptively prior form. In terms of the elementary operations (§ 5). the primitive is no
longer the equivalence relation but a set of incremental and zeroing operations (§ 5.1).
which produce one form out of another, A -+ B. However, this direct operational formulation does not suffice for the extensions of § 5.3.
18 Vn for nominalized verb, i.e. V with zero or other affix occurring in the positions of
N; and so for Va, etc. (P) in the formulas below indicates that some cases covered by the
formula have P and others do not. S for sentence. The words 'subject' and 'object' (or 0)
represent not constituents but the pre-t and post- V material in the elementary sentence
forms, and material brought into these positions by specified operations on these forms.
19 One could also analyze this structure not as N Vor V 0 operating on S, but as N V X
and X V 0 (as sentences) with an S replacing the X. E.g. I know that he came = I know
something plus He came. That he came is afact = Something is afact plus He came. Among
the various difficulties with such an analysis is the fact that for some of these W verbs there
is no natural X: e.g. I hope that he will come would require at best I hope for something.
The difference in analysis is one of convenience of description. It does not affect the
essential existence or properties of transformations.
20 More precisely, the ifentry is if S1 or S2 ..• or Sn. There is a whether variant of if, and
in certain situations a whether variant of that. Also, that N VO has the variant that N
should VO and in certain positions necessarily for N to VO. Sn' is distinct from Sn,
because it can contain Y: His having been present was denied. Sn includes Ving as well as
Vn, with of before objects beginning with N: His purchasing of the books was deliberate,
His retention of the report was deliberate. Sn can be taken to include also the deformation
N's An (His quickness) from N is A, and N's Nn (His manhood) from N is N.
21 Other limited or variant objects of W can be seen in, for example, I prefer it that he
should come. Also P Nt that Nj (I) V 0 has a variant Ni to V 0: I believe about him that he is
wrong, I believe him to be wrong, I know him to have come late; this variant is comfortable
primarily if V = be or if Y has operated on V. For a particular subcategory of W, to be in
this object is zeroed, yielding: I believe him wrong, I consider him an authority, I find him
at fault. Note that I ordered them present is obtained here from I ordered (about them) that
they be present, while I ordered them to be present is obtained from I ordered them that they
be present (in the object list below); the latter means that the order was addressed to them,
but the former does not.
22 For the necessary zeroing of Ni's when the subject of W is Nt. see below.
23 Among limited objects of particular W there is I let go of it (in addition to I let it go).
24 This is a crude statement of the differences required by but.
25 There is also a possibility of operating on three sentences at once, e.g. S1 related S2 to
S3.
26 A similar permutation in the question Would he see her? etc. wiJI be seen below to be
occasioned by the dropping of ij: Permutations like This I like in the elementary sentence
could also be considered to depend upon the addition of a stress morpheme, and so based
upon an increment. The position of not in respect to tense in He did nol 6Q, etc., caa be ana-

278

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

lyzed as the original position and not a permutation; but there are other special transformations on not.
2? Or rather than D: second morpheme of V.
28 This can happen as the result of permutation, as when the passive NI t V Na -+Na t
Yen by NI puts as the domain of the first N of the resultant the word category which had
been the domain of the second N in the operand. It happens as the result of zeroing, as
when the zeroing of P in P N of measure, N V P N ...... N V N, brings into the apparent n
position to Va noun of measure which had not been in the domain of the n of that V (e.g.
minute is in the domain of the n of tick off. as in The clock ticked off a minute -+ A minute
was ticked offby the clock, but it is not in the n of pause, as in Hepausedfora ft/inute ...... He
paused a minute where "" 3 A minute was paused by him). It also happens as the result
of adding constants, as in He smoked cigars ...... He began the smoking of cigars, where
began becomes the value of V and we can say that the smoking becomes the value of n in
respect to any transformation which is defined on n and accepts the smoking as n of
began.
29 Since every transformation leaves its effect, if only in the choice of subcategory for a
given category symbol, the precise statement of arguments and of operands and resultants
for each transformation opens the way to computation of transformational decomposition.
There exist cases of <PI followed by a zeroing which has the effect of an inverse of <PI, but
these have to be recognized only when a trace has been left, i.e. when some <PI has intervened (for an example, see end of § 5.213).
30 Under W we have to include is Am of manner, and also the binary verbs.
31 A sentence can be ambiguous because of the range of meanings of a word in it (e.g.
[ like the sound; [like the Sound) or because of a degeneracy (homonymity) resulting from
transformations (e.g. They have shined shoes . ..... They have shoes which are shined, by zeroing
of which are ..... wh (They have shoes. The shoes are shined.); and also They have shined shoes
..... They shined shoes by the Y operator have Yen}. In the former type, dictionary ambiguity, the ambiguity disappears when some of the other words in the n-tuple are varied
(e.g. The boat sank in the Sound). In the latter, grammatical ambiguity, the ambiguity
remains no matter how the n-tuple is varied, so long as the altered n-tuples can occur at all
in the two grammatical sources.
32 For this analysis of the, see the papers of Beverly Robbins in the Transformations and
Discourse Analysis Papers, and in her The Definite Article in English Transformations,
Papers on Formal Linguistics, No.4, Mouton & Co., The Hague, 1968.
33 In this form we no longer have binary transformations. Each binary is the result of a
divisor of type 3 (whose resultant is not a sentence) followed by a divisor of type 1 (operating on a sentence, with a deformed sentence as increment).
34 'Local synonymity' is used for synonymity in respect to the particular environing words
in a structure.
35 This is an extreme example of the fact that when a word occurs in a sentence, it does
not carry its full dictionary meaning, but only such meaning as can constitute a normally
accepted (or, depending on the discourse, a jocular, shocking, etc.) meaning in relation to
the other words with which it is grammatically juxtaposed.
36 Though the determiners of X. P may be the other words of the K, the zeroing does not
occur in a Kby itself, but only when one form is juxtaposed to another (as happens also in
morphophonemics). Within a K or an insert or operator by itself there is no redundancy
which is removable. In those K in which a particular subcategory of n, or a particular
subject-object pair, determine that a particular V (or set of locally synonymous V) is the
main one, the V may be replaced by a constant of low semantic specificity (e.g. have or
be or is P); but the V wiII not be zeroed (something which would produce a new kind of
V-less sentence): He wrote apoem-+He did a poem; ,.., 3 He poem.
3? Here the V.ping and to Vap do not have the form of inserts. However, dropping them
only changes the form of the subject or object to N, which is a respectable grammatical
form. Note that the plural agreement is a late morphophonemic operation, after the
zeroing.

TRANSFORMA TIONAL THEOR Y

279

38 Although the evidence that one form has been derived from another by the dropping
of some material is of the same kind here as throughout, it is less obvious in the cases discussed here. The evidence that (1) Nl caused N2 ~ (2) The V.ping 0/ Nl caused N2 is that
for every sentence of form (1) there exists a sentence of form (2), the difference in acceptability between various Nl, N2 choices in (1) being the same as in (2). Furthermore, this
holds only for V = occur, happen, act, etc. and not for V = end, is brief, etc. In contrast,
for Nl ate N2 we don't find The Ving 0/ Nl ate N2. Hence calise here is not a Vwhich simply
occurs in a K, but is a sentence operator. I.e. its subject (and Q) is a deformed K. When
we find N (other than 'human' N) as its subject, this N is obtained from the deformed K
by dropping the Ving; and the Ving drops only if it is the appropriate one for cause.
39 Dropping to Vap is different from zeroing repetitive Vi or to Vi after an antecedent
to Vi (§ 5.22): I spoke and I expect him to.
40 Going beyond language to specialized subject-matter languages which contain greater
restrictions, methods of this kind could be used to achieve more simply characterizable
subjects, objects, etc. Thus to measure a room could be taken as reduced from to measure
the length (etc.) 0/ a room; to rig the convention from to rig the voting (or the activity etc.) 0/
the convention, to load the gun from to load the cylinder 0/ the gun. In this way the Q of the
V would also become more explicit.
41 Under certain sentence operators, the K is only (or primarily) of the be type; and after
certain of these the be is then always dropped: I call him a/ool; I consider him a/ool, I con-

sider him to be a /001.
42 But if the V of K2 is not be or the appropriate verb, the wh-word remains: I saw the
man who buys milk (unless this man has been familiarly regarded as being the person with

a characteristic relation to milk, in this case an inveterate buyer of it: he might then be
referred to as the milkman).
43 The collecting of the disjunctional N, the formation of the wh-words, the Nt permutation (when N is available, hence no permutation in Who will go?), are all transformations
which appear elsewhere too. The W needed for the question are those that take if. The W
needed for the imperative are those that permit please in the operand. That the lost subject of the operand is uniquely you is seen from Wash yourself! etc.; it is therefore zeroable
as Nap.
44 We can define a set of proword substitutions which are similar to various types of
zeroing, but operate under somewhat different conditions. Thus the disjunctions and conjunctions of § 5.23 may be replaced by indefinite pronouns and by certain words operating
as classifiers (e.g. people in the sense of someone; act in the sense of do something) in all
syntactic situations, and by zero in only certain syntactic ones. Words of almost all categories (chiefly N) can be replaced by prowords of that category and by words that are
semantically inclusive in respect to them; this is more likely to occur if the word is referentrepeating. The zeroing of repetitive material (§ 5.22) is similar only to this last, but occurs
also in some syntactic situations in which pronouning does not occur (e.g. while Ving)
and also in various categories which have no proword. The zeroing of 'appropriate' words
(§ 5.21) is related to a much more general system of locally appropriate sub-categories,
which includes synonyms and certain kinds of antonyms as well as sets of words based on
looser local semantic similarity.
45 This relation of zero to pronoun does not hold in § 5.22, where a word is zeroed only if
it is the same word as the antecedent; nor in § 5.21.
46 The ambiguity of Every place has been taken by someone arises from the two possible
orderings of the disjunctional operation (which yielded someone) and the conjunctional
operation (which yielded every). We begin with
Ai place has been taken by NJ
If we first make a conjunction on the A (i.e. Al place has been taken by Nl and A2 place has
been taken by Nl ... and An place has been taken by Nl) we obtain
Every place has been taken by Nl.

280

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

If here we make a disjunction on the N (i.e. Every place has been taken by NI or every
place has been taken by N2 ... or every place has been taken by N m ) we obtain
Every place has been taken by someone

in the sense of
(3 N) (V A) A place has been taken by N.
However, if in the original sentence we first make a disjunction on the N, yielding
Al place has been taken by someone

and on this a conjunction on the A, we obtain
Every place has been taken by someone

in the sense of
(V A) (3 N) A place has been taken by N.

There is a possibility that this Q-zeroing can be derived through the Sn form, where Q
has insert form.
48 In the example given here, what can be replaced by whatever; and what has been dropped
is anything, the things, etc., which are pronouns for disjunctions of N. However, there are
also cases in which what can be replaced by the single thing that, or the like; in such cases,
what has been dropped is a pronoun or a classifier NCI for a single N: I heard what he said
and you heard it too; What he planted has grown to be quite a tree.
49 A partly similar case is the rare dropping of pronoun or Ncl which may occur after
certain the A, where the the indicates a lost wh-insert connected to that N: the true +- the
things which are true. This is mine -<-- This is my NI or N2 ... or N n ; This is his +- This is his
NI or N2 ... or N n •
50 X for pronoun of X. SON! indicates S with N! omitted.
51 The apposition with comma is different: It was (widely) read, what he wrote.
52 Almost all, because there remain a few pure permutational (asyntactic) transformations. To derive these, we would have to add a fifth type of elementary transformation
which carries out restricted permutations.
53 See in particular Henry M. Hoenigswald, Language Change and Linguistic Reconstruction, Chicago 1960.
54 As an example of a limitation on similarity, note that the It transformation does not
extend to zero N plus wh-S: see the end of § 5.23.
47

11

DECOMPOSITION LATTICES

This paper presents the transformational decomposition of paragraphs from
scientific texts. The decomposition is displayed in a form that shows the
order relation among the transformations. In the decomposition of a
sentence, a transformation-occurrence CPl is an upper bound of another one,
CP2' if the operand of CPl contains CP2; and CPl is the least upper bound of CP2
if there is no CP3 such that CPl is an upper bound of CP3 and CP3 is an upper
bound of CP2' It will be seen that each decomposition is a lattice if the sentence
contains only one kernel-sentence (,kernels'), and like a semi-lattice otherwise. We say 'like' because in this case right and left are distinguished:
XC Y # y C X; C = conjunction. To distinguish these we draw a main
branch through C for X in X C Y and for Y in Y C X:
XCV:

kA
or

C

,p

XYYX

vex:

k ~C
or

YXXY

Only the 'correct' reading is presented for each sentence; we assume that,
given a set of all possible decompositions of a sentence (each differing in
meaning from the others), it will be possible, by comparisons among neighboring sentences, to select the 'correct' (intended) reading.
Though many detailed problems remain, it seems that the decompositional
path to a given set of kernel sentences (K) is unique. However, in the present
state of transformational theory, it may be that for certain sentences, a
particular reading can be decomposed into different kernels and transformations, depending on whether we use certain conjectured transformations; examples of this are given (e.g. parts 2, 3 of SI of text I).
The procedure for obtaining the decomposition is as follows: Starting
with the given sentence (S), we ask what unary or binary transformation can
be undone at this point; the residual sentence must be transformationally
related to the given sentence. We present a unary as a node on a line going
to the right, and a binary as a node joining a downward or upward line to
the line going right. If more than one transformation can be undone in this
Excerpts from Transformations and Discourse Analysis Papers 70 (1967).

281

282

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

sentence, we treat them as an unordered set of transformations at this point.
The resultant of undoing a transformation or an unordered set of transformations is again a sentence, and we repeat the procedure on the resultant
sentence. (We may find unordered sets of sequences of transformations, as in
more and more - appears as in part I of SI of text 1). The procedure can be
checked by recomposing the sentence from the kernels obtained by the
decomposition. In the resulting lattice, the universal points are sentences,
the residual kernel sentences being the null points at the right. (This orientation is used here, instead of having the universal point at the top, in order
to facilitate writing the language material along the lattice lines.) Nodes along
a line are unary transformations; nodes at a junction of two lines which do
not meet again are binary transformations. Each transformation operates
on the combined resultant of all transformations not to its left to which it is
connected by lines. As a pictorial convention, transformations operating
independently on subject, verb, object, are written in that order from top
downwards (e.g. it,probably, the in S3 of text I). (Right angles in the drawing
are made so that the unary transformations on a K should appear along a
horizontal line:

t== is equivalent to

The set of all component sentences of the given S is obtained from the
lattice of transformations as follows: Going in either direction: For each
node (including Sand K, at the ends), with n lines entering the node, each
choice of m of these lines (I ~ m ~ n) identifies a sentence which is the joint
resultant of the nearest nodes on these m lines, operating on the resultants
of the next nodes further out. Each such sentence is transformationally
intermediate between the sentences, connected to it by lines, to its left and
those not to its left. Both directions have to be used if all component sentences are to be obtained.
For an example of component sentences, for m = I, taken in each direction,
see under Sl of text r. For an example of the cross-product component
sentences (for each choice of m, 1 ~ m ~ n), see under S8 of text r.
One type of component sentence may not be obtained from the above, as
follows: In

X may be an operator on C, or it may operate on Y or on Z in the form which
they receive under C, or on the Y C Z entity. In all these cases, X could not
be applied to the right of C. But in some cases, the X could have operated on

283

DECOMPOSITION LATTICES

Y and on Z separately, with the resultant of X Y C X Z being the same as X
operating on Y C Z. In such cases, X Y and X Z are component sentences
too, although the figure shows only X (Y C Z). Examples of such X: D,
plural, zeroings in both Y and Z. E.g. in S4 of text I.
Remarks about the transformations:
indicates any appropriate verb for the given kernel or transformation.
indicates any appropriate verb-operator: N V n-+N U VnP n
u
(e.g. effects removal of gland, has function, suffers death, has
importance). n indicates the object of a V; P: preposition; V:
verb; N: noun.
is Va
_~--_e S, including specified U such as _e--... S, means that the V n
of S are operated on by the U: N is important-+ N has importance.
A tumor masculinizes-+A tumor is masculinizing.
_,:_ _ _• S, where W represents any verb having a sentence (nominalized)
as its subject or object (but not both), means that the S receives
an appropriate nominalized form:

Vap

tho

-~

aclrenal functions

A sexual function of the adrenal exists.
indicates connective wh-word (which, etc.) which is zeroed
together with following is: adrenal gland+-gland which is
adrenal. Although derivation via wh is uncomfortable in many
cases, such as the above, it fits the rest of the grammar: prime
gland+-gland which is prime.
A

wh

In all cases of
r
: ~ , Band C have a noun in common, and it
is understood that C is transformed so that this common noun
comes first, if it is not already first in C: adrenal is a gland-+
(the) gland is adrenal.
A indicates AnVssBn: Its removal leads to death.
Y
(Xn: nominalized X; V•• : connective
L -_ _ _ _... B
verb)

I

u

r~onj

:
_

indicates A Conj B: He came and he left.
The book which he wants is here.
L -_ _ _ _... B
Conj. may be C, wh, or other conjunctions.

:
_

A

284
STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS
o
X
indicates the zeroing of X.
the, this, and other pro-adjectives are traces of lost C K: e.g. the adrenal+adrenal (pair) is unique.
it and other pronouns are traces of lost CK too.
all, plural, and other quantifiers and indefinite pronouns are traces of

conjunctions and disjunctions of K, hence of CK ... CK.
In some cases, imperfectly established limited transformations would yield
more reasonable K; this may be the only source of non-unique
decomposition (above). Informationally unreasonable and
repetitive K are in any case unavoidable. Thus in 85 of text I
gland is gland is inescapable if we are to have an occurrence of
gland to which we can attach whose different functions .... The
source without gland is gland would be:
u

makes

p - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -... Chemistry progresses
o

wh

.-4"<:::::'--------- adrenal is gland
gland promises X

is full of

which yields Progress of chemistry makes the adrenal gland full
ofpromise; then whose functions ... would have to be attached to
the first gland, which would differ in meaning from the given 85.
We could also have:
makes

u

---~--------------_ chemistry progresses

the

L-----i_------_---.. adrenal is gland
fuli of
L-______is ......
___... gland promises X

yielding: The progress of chemistry makes the adrenal (into) a
gland full of promise.
However, this contains: The progress of chemistry makes the
adrenal (into) a gland, and this may not be a desired component
sentence of S5.

285

DECOMPOSITION LA TTICES

TEXT I: P. Delost, Lafonction sexuelle de la cortico-surrenale, sentences 1-9,

translated:

SI: The adrenal appears more and more as a prime endocrine
gland,' its importance grows in the animal scale; among the
mammals, it has become indispensable for life, its removal leads
rapidly to death; its functions are multiple.
I the

SI
32 Z8
--""'1r"":='-"';:::':':';+::":::~----4>----';'--1'-:;---""'::::::==- adrenal is gland
appears
6
as
L-._ _ _ _ _•

gland is endocrine

:-1_-----. gland is prime.

L--:o

3

wh

27

12
the

.......- - - - -.. gland is endocrine

7
it

10
in scale

11
0

9

adrenal is important

grows

wh

8U

animals Vap scale

IS

25 the

it
24

23

14
adrenal is
\J
indispensable U

mammal lives

for
0

a mammal's

X removes adrenal
rapidly

/8
it

to

19U

'----4_.... mammal dies
29 it
31

gland functions

are multiple
30U

Alternatives:
Part 2: In the following, the transformation X would have to rearrange the
words of D 1 , D z : (along a scale)
,'t
in (among?)
X
scalewise
animals
grow<:> gland is important
••_ _ _ _...-._ _ _ _ _....
e------=D.

=0,

U

286

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

Part 3: PASAP is the appropriate passive-like transformation, e.g. X
requires Y -+ Y is indispensable for X. It could be avoided by having as K:
Adrenal is indispensable for mammal. But it is not clear that this yields
among mammals (or only for mammals).
plural

mammal requires adrenal

' - - - - - _ - - -.. mammal live,

u

We assume that part 3 (nodes 14-27) is especially related to part 2 (i.e.
adjoined to it), while parts 2-3 and part 4 are independently adjoined to
part 1.
Examples of component sentences, excluding the cross-product ones (with
automatic features such as a added):
Resultant of node
1: The adrenal is a gland.
2: An adrenal is a gland which is endocrine.
An adrenal is an endocrine gland.
3: A gland which is endocrine is prime (of prime importance).
An endocrine gland is prime.
4: An adrenal is an endocrine gland which is prime.
An adrenal is a prime endocrine gland.
5: An adrenal appears as a prime endocrine gland.
6: An adrenal appears more and more as a prime endocrine gland.
7: It is important.
8: An adrenal has importance.
9: Its importance grows. Note that grows operates on the combined resultant
of it and of U. When a sentence-operator, W, or a conjunctional verb,
V.s> operates on the resultant of a verb-operator, U, on K, the effect is as
though W operated on a complete nominalization of K: thus
U

- - - - - - - - - <•. . - - - - - - - -..... gland functions

is important ••

yields: A gland has function; then: A function of a gland is important.
whereas
is important ••- - - - - - - - - - - - - -_ _..... gland function

DECOMPOSITION LATTICES

287

yields: Functioning of a gland is important; or: That a gland function is
important.
The Vss case appears below in leads to
10: Its importance grows in (along) a scale.
11: Its importance grows in an animal scale (or: a scale of animals).
12: Its importance grows in the animal scale.
13: A mammal has life.
14: An adrenal is indispensable for a mammal's life.
15: It is indispensable for a mammal's life.
16: An adrenal has become indispensable for a mammal's life.
17: X effects an adrenal's removal.
18: X removes it.
19: A mammal suffers death.
20: Its removal by X leads to a mammal's death.
21: Its removal leads to a mammal's death.
22: Its removal by X leads rapidly to a mammal's death.
23: It has become indispensable for a mammal's life; its removal leads
rapidly to a mammal's death.
24: Among mammals, 23.
25: Among the mammals, 23.
26: Among mammals, it has become indispensable for life, its removal leads
rapidly to death.
27: 13; resultant of 25 and 26.
28: The adrenal gland appears more and more as a prime endocrine gland;
27. (The resultants of 1 and 6 are not combined until the operation of 28.
If part 1 (nodes 1-6 and their K) had been a separate sentence, the
resultants of 1 and 6 would have been combined immediately.)
29: It functions.
30: An adrenal has a function.
31: Its functions are multiple. (Under W, the resultant of U is completely
nominalised into A function of an adrenal, or, with the resultant of it,
into Its function. Certain W, such as are multiple, automatically introduce a plural on the subject ofthis nominalised operand.)
32: 28; 31. This==Sl.
Examples of the component sentences of part 1, going in the decompositional
direction in which each node indicates the removal of the transformation
named at that point:
-1 : An adrenal appears more and more as a prime endocrine gland.
-6: The adrenal appears as a prime endocrine gland.
-5: The adrenal is a prime endocrine gland.
-4: The adrenal is an endocrine gland. The endocrine gland is prime.

288

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

-3:
-2:

A gland is prime. The gland is endocrine.
The adrenal is a gland.

Note that most of these component sentences are not quite identical with
those obtained in the other direction, above.
S2: Though the functions of the medulla and of the adrenal cortex
daily show themselves more numerous, one must confess that their
mechanisms of action are as yet quite imperfectly established.

daily
medulla
functions

morc
than

adrenal
cortex

u

functions

medulla
functions

u
quite imperfectly
S2

must
though

X establishes
one

Passive

adrenal
cortex
functions

they
V with N m•ft
-+UNlllanPVn

" ' - - - "medulla
acts

with
mechanism

adrenal
corte"
acts

Part 1: What is conjoined by more than is lost, but in the presence of the
adverb daily on U (shows itself), the than S which would be most readily
zero able here would be: than the functions ... had previously shown themselves
to be numerous.

289

DECOMPOSITION LATTICES

The U is assumed to be in the operand of numerous because of is repeated.
In contrast, The functions of the medulla and the adrenal cortex might perhaps
be better obtained from:
are numerous

•

u

•

r

and

the
t:e

: medulla functions

'--- - - -..
~---__ adrenal corlex functions

Part 2: A slightly different reading (and meaning) would give:
they

•

r

and

wilh
mechanism

•

:

medulla aCIS

' - - - - - - - . _ - - - - -_ _ adrenal cortex aCls
with mechanism

N acts with mechanism--+N has mechanism of action; like N talks with great
speed-+ N has great speed of talking. In symbols: V with N man --+ UNman of Vn.
N man : certain nouns of manner, such as mechanism.

Here as elsewhere we assume that nominalized sentences (Sn) under
sentence operators (e.g. X establishes their mechanism of action, or The
adrenal's removal leads to death) are obtained via a U which first nominalizes
the verb:
X removes adrenal--+ X effects removal of adrenali --+ X's removal of adrenal
Y dies
--+ Y suffers death
)
leads to Y's death.

But in many cases the Sn is more natural than the presumed intervening U:
N talked with speed ~N shows speed of talking--+~ N's speed of talking
- - - - - - - - - - - - - + ) impressed me.

Part 1 is placed above Part 2 to indicate the order in the sentence. In some
cases it is difficult to represent the order of words and segments in the
sentence (as distinct from the order of transformations).
S3: The adrenal cortex certainly regulates the electrolyte balance
and acts on the metabolism of the glucides; it probably intervenes
in the metabolism of the proteins and the lipids; it presumably
participates in the balance of the blood and the connective tissue.

290

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS
certainly

53

adrenal
cortex
regulales

Ihe
(a.c.)
and

electrolyte balances

U

the
(balance)
the
acts on

glucide melabolis.s

the
(metabolism)

it

U

a,c.
intervenes
in

Ihe
and
U

Ihe
(metabolism)

it

lipid melabolises
pi
a.c.
participates
in

Ih.
and

Ih.
(balance)

prolein metabolises
pi
Ih.

U

Ihe
U

blood balances

connective tissue
balances

Part I: The sentential residue should perhaps be Electrolyte is in balance, in
the form of U operating on a dubious Electrolyte balances.
In sequences of and or .. or , it is not clear whether the third part should be
added to the first part (as is done above) or to the second; and so on. It
should be clear that in all cases of a conjunction, we assume that there appear
to the left of the conjunction a zeroing of identical portions of the secondary
sentence sufficient to yield the resultant sentence as it appears here.

OPERATOR GRAMMAR

12
THE TWO SYSTEMS OF GRAMMAR:
REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

1. INTRODUCTION
1.0 Summary
1.1. An Extension of Transformational Analysis
1.2. An Extension of Free Variation in Structural Linguistics
2. UNRESTRICTED FREE VARIANTS FOR RESTRICTED OPERATORS
2.1. Be-ing
2.2. Very

2.3. Adverbs of Manner
2.4. Subjunctive
2.5. Time-Conjunctions
2.6. Comparatives
2.7. Special Comparatives
2.8. Wh2.9. Vocabulary
3. UNRESTRICTED MORPHOPHONEMIC SOURCE FOR RESTRICTED OPERATORS

3.1. Plural
3.2. Tense
4. RESTRICTION DETERMINED BY ENVIRONMENT
4.1. Subjunctive
4.2. Adverbs of Manner
4.3. Reciprocals
4.4. Sentence Nominalization: Sn
5. PREDICATIONAL SOURCE FOR INCREMENTS

5.0. Introduction
5.1. Noun Adjuncts
5.2. Verb Adjuncts
5.3. Compound Tense; Auxiliaries
5.4. Verb-Operators
5.5. Subordinate Conjunctions
5.6. Moods
5.7. And, or
6. RESULT

6.1. Summary of Reductions
6.2. An Umestricted Subset of Sentences
6.3. A Sublanguage for Objective Information
Excerpts from TransforrruJtion and Discourse Analysis Papers 79 (1969).

293

294

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMA TIONAL LINGUISTICS

7. THE PREDICATE SYSTEM

7.0. The Metalanguage
7.1. The Base
7.2. The Openrtors
7.3. The Values
7.4. Morphemic Shape
7.5. String Shape
7.6. Relation to Linguistic Analysis
8. THE MORPHOPHONEMIC SYSTEM
8.0. Introduction
8.1. The Morphemic and String Changes
8.2. The Interpretation of T
8.3. Creation of Subsets
8.4. String Change
8.5. String Properties under T
8.6. Invariants
8.7. Structure of {S-I}
8.8. Derivation
9. BEYOND THE PRESENT ANALYSIS

1. INTRODUCTION

1.0. Summary

From an attempt to isolate the independent elements of sentence construction,
we arrive at two different and separately acting grammatical systems, which
contribute to this construction: a system of predicates (with and, or) and a
system which can be considered an extension of morphophonemics (which
is change purely of phonemic sequences). The predicate system carries all
the objective information in the sentence, and the most natural interpretation
of its structure is that of giving a report. The morphophonemic system is
interpretable as being paraphrastic, and changes at most the speaker's or
hearer's relation to the report. The grammar of the language as a whole is
simply the resultant of these two systems.
The method used to obtain this result arises from the characteristic problem of structural linguistics: that not all combinations of elements, but
only certain ones, occur as acceptable sentences. This limitation is clearly
related to the information-bearing power of language. We see this relation
in the fact that elements whose environments are complementary to each
other (e.g. am and are in I am going, You are going) cannot be the bearers of
informational differences (unless their different neighbors are then zeroed);
and elements whose environmen~s differ in particular ways have corresponding differences in meaning.
If element A requires element B in its environment, or if all of the environments of A have certain similarities and differences with respect to all of
the environments of B, then we say that A is (syntactically) dependent 0 nB.

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

295

The question now arises whether we can isolate all these dependences (i.e.
restrictions on element-combination) into particular paraphrastic transforms
of the restricted sentences, leaving other transforms of the same sentences
without the restrictions. This is achieved by showing that one can obtain,
within transformational methods, unrestricted free or automatic sourcesentences for all sentences which contain restricted word-combinations
(§§ 2,3), and by showing that forms which are restricted to particular subsets
of words (having particular properties) can be derived without resort to this
dependence (§ 4).
The set ofrestrictionless transforms that is obtained contains paraphrases
of all sentences of the language. It is a sublanguage, closed under the nonparaphrastic transformations (6.2, 3), and in it the choices and the relative
positions of words are not affected by any dependences aside from a few
very general formation-rules (7.2, 7.5). Within these basic structures of
sentences, and within the limits of the vocabulary, the word-combinations
are determined solely by the combinations of information (more precisely, the
report) that is being expressed. This sublanguage can be put into an operator
form far simpler than is possible for the language as a whole (§ 5). The operators
in the construction of a sentence are apparently linearly ordered. They consist of predicates (verb; or be plus adjective or noun or preposition) or and,
or; each resultant of an operator is formed by placing the operator word after
its first argument, thus forming the word sequence that is the sentence.
The sublanguage carries all the objective information, or report, which
is carried in the language, and can be used without the rest of the language.
Indeed, every sentence of the language can be decomposed (by an algorithm)
into a sentence of the report-sublanguage (containing all that is reported in
the original sentence) plus various paraphrastic transformations. But if the
sentence contains pronouns or other referentials (including covert ones)
whose antecedent can be in some other sentence of the discourse, this antecedent cannot in general be determined by a sentence-decomposing algorithm.
A discourse in the language can be reduced to one in the sublanguage by
reducing each sentence to its source in this sUblanguage. Many sentences,
more precisely word-sequences that can be read as a sentence, are grammatically ambiguous, i.e. have more than one source from which they could be
transformationally derived. This is due to transformational degeneracies:
different transformations which yield the same word-sequence, or zeroings
and pronounings of different material. In many cases, a comparison of the
alternative sources of a sentence with those of neighboring sentences in the
discourse shows which of its sources best fits which source of the neighbors.
The report which is carried in the original discourse is preserved in the
reduced discourse, aside from ambiguities; but now various processings of

296

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

the information in the reduced discourse can be performed in orderly ways
that were unavailable for the original discourse.
In the sublanguage the connection between the simple syntactic relations
in it and the meaning of words and classes becomes much sharper than in the
language as a whole. Investigation of what kind of information can be borne
in language, and how language can be modified to carry other kinds of
information, is made possible by analysis of the structure of this reportsublanguage, in which every item of structure is relevant to the informational
burden that language carries. The few types of predicates (7.2) which impose
and preserve partial orderings in their operands,l together with and, or, are
found to be sufficient and necessary for the information that language can
carry. And the simple method of placing the fixed-argument operator-word
(the predicate or and or or) between the argument words (7.5) is found
sufficient to enable a parentheses-less string of words (i.e. a sentence) to
indicate the operator-structured information that language carries.
The whole of the rest of the language can be derived out of this sublanguage, as source, by a system of paraphrastic transformations (morphophonemics of syntactic sequences), which themselves have a particular grammatical structure, and a SUbjective (or purely paraphrastic) semantic character.
They bring in no new independent words (or new report) into the sentence,
but are especially useful for abbreviation. It is these paraphrastic transformations that bring in grammatical ambiguity and complex (and simultaneously differing) string relations (affixes and positionings) among the words
of the sentence.
One can, of course, make a description of the whole language, but it is now
possible to see that there is no coherent structure in the grammar of a whole
language. The whole grammar is a resultant of two quite different structures,
the second operating on the prior one. Each system is coherent, as being
derivable from a tightly interrelated set of primitives, in a way that the whole
grammar is not; and each has a natural interpretation. Together they account
for the forms and the interpretation (meaning) of the whole language.
1.1. An Extension of Transformational Analysis

In transformational analysis, we define over the set of sentences of a language
some of them wholly acceptable and some less so, an equivalence relation
'transformation' (written ~) between two subsets of sentences, each being
of a particular sentence-form.2 This relation preserves the acceptabilityordering of the corresponding sentences of the two forms. It has been found
that there are two types of transformations: One, the paraphrastic (T), holds
between two sentence-forms, A, B, each having the independent variables
Xl' x2 , ••• , xn> when each ordered set of n-tuples of values of these variables

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

297

determines the same acceptability-ordering for the sentences it produces out
of A as for those it produces out of B.
The other, the incremental, holds between two sentence-sets, B of m
variables, and C containing these m variables and at least one additional
variable called C's increment, when, given an ordered set of m-tuples of
values of the common m variables, the acceptability-ordering which this set
of m-tuples determines for the sentences of B is related in certain readily
summarizable ways to the acceptability-ordering it determines for the sentences
of C. The chief relation is the following: Let A be a sentence-set of the variables
Xl" '" Xm- 1 with an acceptability-ordering for the m -I-tuples of values, B a
sentence-set of the same variables with an incremental Xm , and C a sentence-set
of the same m variables with an incremental xm + l' Then for each value of xm+ 1
in C, the acceptability-ordering for the m -I-tuples of values Ofxl' .. " xm- 1
in respect to each value of xm is the same as it is in B.2a Thus the ordering
of the sentences of C consists, in this case, of an ordering of Xm for each value
of xm+ 1 and an ordering of the m-I-tuples of values for each value of Xm,
the latter ordering being carried over from B and there from A.
Thus we have a paraphrastic transformation between N V Aly and N's
Ving is A, as in:
The ball rolls slowly, and: The ball's rolling is slow
(both normal word-choices, even though the second is less comfortable),
The rock rolls slowly, and: The rock's rolling is slow
(both normal word-choices),
The photon rolls slowly,

and:

The photon's rolling is slow

(both peculiar or nonsensical).
In contrast, there is no transformation between Nl VN2 and N2 VN1 :
A truck carried a boat,

and:

A boat carried a truck

(both normal), but
Man invented ether, and: Ether invented man
(the first normal, the second nonsensical).
And we have an incremental transformation in the increment slowly (or
is slow), as is seen in the fact that, with roll as value ofxmwe have the same
acceptability-ordering for The ball rolls slowly, The rock rolls slowly, The
photon rolls slowly as for The ball rolls, The rock rolls (both normal) and The
photon rolls (peculiar or nonsensical), In contrast, The man slept is normal,
and The microbe slept is peCUliar, but both The man slept slowly, and The
microbe slept slowly are peculiar. Thus slowly (as xm+ 1) preserves the acceptability of sentences with roll (as xm) but reduces it for sentences with sleep
(as xm), Increments impose an ordering upon their immediate argument

298

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

(which is the Xm in this case), and the acceptability-ordering of their resultant sentences (C, here) is a product of the ordering ofxm under the increment, and the ordering of the m - I-tuples for each Xm •
The increment in C may therefore be considered an operator (note 1)
operating on the xl> ... , Xm sentence-form and altering in a particular way
the acceptability produced there by the m-tuples of values.
In some cases of A+-+B, one or more of the variables in B has a domain e
which is only a proper subset of its domain d in A: we write A(d) for A over
domain d, and B (ecd). In such cases, the transformation holds only for the
smaller domain e (of B); or else we can define a directed transformational
operator A~B, more precisely A(d)~B(ecd), which derives B(ecd) out of
A(d) as a transform of A over the smaller domain e.
This is not the only situation in which a directed transformation, ~, is
defined. In some transformational work there is a different, though not conflicting, interest in defining an operator ..... Because there are degenerate
transformations, so that there can be T i : A .... Band T j : C .... B, we may find that
the domain of some variable Xi in the A-form is a proper subset of the domain
of Xi in B. In these degenerate cases, the domain of Xi in B is completely covered by the domains of Xi in A, C, and in any other proposed sources for the
form B. The situation is different for the analysis proposed in this paper.
Here if the domain of Xi in B is only a proper subset of the domain of Xi in
A, then there are no transforms, different from B, which cover the residue of
the domain of Xi in A. In such a case we must take A as the source, from
which B is derived. For if we did not, then indeed A could be derived from
B (instead ofB from A) for that part of the domain ofxi which is common to
both A and B; but the A form for the residue of the domain of XI would still
have to be formed in A, since by assumption it could not be derived from any
other form over that residual domain.
The methods proposed in the present paper examine the domains of the
transformations, in particular the incremental ones, and thereby determine a
particular organization of the transformations. The chief method used here
will show that, given an incremental A(d) .... B(ecd}, we can find some sentence-form B*(d)(ofthe same independent variables as B(ecd), but without
the reduction of domain in any variable), such that A(d)+-+B*(d) is an unrestricted incremental transformation and B*(d) .... B(ecd) is a restricted
paraphrastic transformation. s Finding B*(d) makes it possible to separate
increments from domain-restriction, i.e. to remove domain-restriction from
the increments.

1.2. An Extension of Free Variation in Structural Linguistics
From the point of view of linguistic structure the methods proposed here

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

299

investigate free variation among morphemic elements. Structural linguistics
deals with the distribution of elements, i.e. the environmental restrictions
on their combinability in making sentences of the language. The fundamental
relations are: two elements A, B, may be complementary variants of each
other (if all sentence-making environments of A differ in part from all those
of B); or they may be free variants of each other (if B occurs in the same environments as A, and if sentences which differ only in having B instead of A
are considered structurally equivalent); or else they are distinct ('contrastive').
In phonology, complementary variants are well known (e.g. English unaspirated t after s but aspirated t after word-initial), as are free variants (e.g.
English released and unreleased t before word-end). In morphology, only
complementary variants are well known. They occur with small phonemic
difference (e.g. knive- before plural, but knife otherwise) and with large (e.g.
be after to and the auxiliaries or before -ing, am after I, are after you and
plural, is otherwise). Complementary variation is known not only for A, B
at identical positions of their respective environments, but also in more
complicated cases; e.g. the discontiguous morphemic entity, which consists
of a plural suffix after the noun and a (perhaps different) plural suffix after
the adjective is complementary to the non-discontiguous plural suffix after
an adjective-less noun: the former occurs only when the environment contains noun plus adjective (-s ... -s in II y a deux erreurs graves), and the latter·
only when the environment contains only a noun and no adjective (-s in II y
a deux erreurs).
Free variants are hardly considered in morphology. There are a few cases
with small phonemic difference; e.g. ekanamiks and iykanamiks for economics pronounced with initial e or i y; or I'll and I will. And there may be a
few with large phonemic difference: e.g. etcetera and and so on. But there is
no recognition of any large system of free variation, or of free variation which
involves various positions distributed thoughout the sentence, and so on.
One reason for this non-recognition was the lack of instances where such
free variation was of use in the formulation of morphological structure.
Another was the question of what criterion would determine that a given A
and B were in free variation to each other, i.e. what would determine that
sentences with A were to be considered equivalent to those having B instead
ofA.
The syntactic relevance of recognizing morphological free variants may be
seen for example in the fact that this relation is necessary in order to obtain
the analyses proposed in this paper; and the morpheme sequences which are
found to be free variants of each other are not similar in phonemic composition, and are in some cases not similar in the sentential position they
occupy, or even in their immediate syntactic statuses. As to the criterion for

300

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

determing that sentences containing A are equivalent to those containing B
(as free variant) instead of A: it is that replacing A by Bdoesnotchangethe
acceptability-ordering of the sentences. In other words, sentences with A
are paraphrastic transforms of sentences having B instead of A.
In particular, there is one type of paraphrastic transformation which
assures the possibility of the type of analysis proposed in this paper. This
is due to the fact that not only does every language contain metalinguistic sentences (including definitions and grammatical statements), but
also every sentence Si can have conjoined to it or operating upon it all the
grammatical and definitional statements about it. Si with these added metastatements can then be considered as the source for Sb which is derived from
the source by zeroing the known metastatements. 38 If a restricted or nonpredicate apparent increment I has no free variant which is unrestricted and
of predicate form, we can always operate on the I-bearing sentences with a
metastatement M defining the I. M need not contain the I restriction, and
can be in the form of a predicate on the I-bearing sentence. Under the M
operator, the I would be a morphophonemic entity due to the M which
defines it and states its presence in the operand of M. The I-bearing sentence
is then a morphophonemic variant of the sentence having the M operator.
The inclusion of free variation as a relation utilized within morphology
completes the utilization of the fundamental relations of structurallinguistics. In the present paper this relation is used for the existing vocabulary of
language. It can later be used (§ 9) in conditions that go beyond the vocabulary, somewhat as phonemic long components used complementary variants
beyond the conditions of sequential phonemes.
2. UNRESTRICTED FREE VARIANTS FOR RESTRICTED OPERA TORS
The whole work of distributional linguistics has been to replace restricted
elements by less restricted ones. In transformational analysis, a restricted
transformational operator is one whose domain is only a proper subset of the
domain of its operand: e.g. the apparent transformation NV-+ N be Ving
does not apply to certain V (~ I am knowing). The major method of the present paper involves a reformulation of each restricted incremental operator,
in such a way that the restriction to a subdomain applies only to a paraphrastic transformation which follows after the increment has operated. This is
achieved mainly by finding an unrestricted free variant for the restricted
increment (§ 2), secondarily by adding to the grammar unrestricted morphophonemic sources for the restricted forms (§ 3), and finally by finding for
the grammatically restricted lists (sub-classes) of words certain environing
words whose presence can determine the subclass properties (§ 4).

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

301

2.1. Be-ing
The be-ing operator which yields, e.g. I am writing poetry from I write poetry
has a restricted domain in that it does not operate on certain verbs: ~ I am
knowing English, ~ I am owning a car. If we seek free variants for this operator
on the verb, we find them in a few perhaps stilted operators on the sentence
such as be in process, be on: My writing poetry is in process. Although these
are in themselves far less comfortable than be-ing, the acceptability-ordering
(and nuance) of sentences with be in process (or its equivalents) and of those
with be-ing is approximately the same for the same sets of word-values. 4 The
passage between these sentence-forms is accomplished by well-established
transformations over these domains. First the argument-skipping transformation (8.1 (9)):
My writing poetry is in process --t I am in process of writing
poetry.
asin:
My driving is slow --t I am slow in driving.
And then:
I am in process of writing poetry --t I am writing poetry.
by zeroing of in process of as a constant of this form, i.e. as the only segment
which is zeroable to produce N is Ving with unchanged object of Ving. The
derivational connection between be in process and be-ing is supported by the
fact that be in process has the same domain restrictions: One would not say
My knowing English is in process, My owning a car is in process. However,
what makes this derivation of interest to our present purposes is the fact that
whereas the domain restriction of be-ing is more or less an unbreakable
grammatical rule, in the case of be in process it appears rather as a matter of
selection (co-occurrence), which can be changed by adding operators that
would affect the reasonableness of the selection, or by cultural changes in
what it is acceptable to say. Thus we can extend the selectional domain by
adding something which really treats the owning of a car as a process, e.g.
My owning a car is finally in process; this may then extend with some difficulty to I amfinally owning a car, although in the latter both the acceptability
and the meaning are more uncertain. Also if one can some day trace the
course of neurophysiological processing of knowing, which so far has not
been seen as a process, we may be able to say My knowing English is in
process. We thus have an increment be in process, which makes no restriction
on its operand sentences, except for selection; and a paraphrase (zeroing to
be-ing) which freezes this selection as a grammatical restriction. Extensions
of the selection, as in My owning a car is finally in process, are not readily
zeroed to be-ing.

302

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

A major respect in which the source proposed here is unrestricted is in the
possibilities of further increments on this increment. Be-ing cannot be nominalized: From I write we have My writing is regrettable, but for (1) { am
writing, ~ My being writing is regrettable. In other forms, be is nominalitable
by -ing: My being here is regrettable. This restriction does not apply to the
source form, which can be nominalized under operators: From (2) My writing
is in process we have (3) My writing being in process is regrettable. Here as in
many other examples below the source form is uncomfortable, but becomes
more comfortable when something is added, as in (4) My writing being still
only in process is regrettable. The only source from which the expanded form
(4) can be directly derived, by certain incremental operators, is (3); hence
(3) must exist. The reason for (4) being more comfortable than (3) is that
(3) is derived from (2) which is overshadowed by its short transform (1),
whereas (4) is derived from (5) My writing is still only in process, which is not
as fully overshadowed by its short transform (6) I am still only writing. And
the reason for (5) being less overshadowed than (2) is presumably that the
increments still only which operate on the 'continuative' operator of (1), (2)
as their argument, are more explicitly related to their argument in its source
form (is in process, in (5), where they appear as adjuncts on it) than in its
short transform (is ... ing, in (6)).
2.2. Very
While most adverbs of degree (e.g. considerably) occur with (modify) all
predicate forms, both verb and adjective, the adverb very does not occur with
verbs. This makes it seem that there is here an intrinsically different modifier
for adjectives. We can find, however, free variants of very, such as to a great
extent, which occur freely with all predicate forms: He favors it to a great
extent, He is favorable to it to a great extent, He is cold to a great extent. We
can then say that there is an unrestricted operator on sentence (in effect, on
predicates) to a great extent; and that over the adjective subset of predicates
(e.g. cold, favorable) this has a free variant very, which provides the same
acceptability-ordering as does to a great extent. This analysis simplifies the
transformational connection in such sentence pairs as
The room darkened to a great extent
and
The room became very dark (+- The room became dark to a
great extent).

If very were not a transform of an adverb which operates also on verbs, we
would not be able to derive the sentences with deverbal adjectives (e.g. He is
very fussy) from their verb sources (e.g. Hefusses to a great extent).

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

303

2.3. Adverbs of Manner

About adverbs of manner two restrictions are known: In their predicate
form they require the oJ-nominalization of their operand: His driving of the
car is quite slow, ~ His driving the car is quite slow (whereas for time-adverbs
both nominalizations occur: His driving of the car is quite frequent, His
driving the car is quitefrequent). And only a particular subclass of morphemes
occurs as manner-adverbs (as others are time-adverbs, etc.), in some cases
depending on the verb. Thus unexpectedly is an adverb offact: He pronounced
my name unexpectedly +- That he pronounced my name was unexpected. Continuously is an adverb of time-distribution: He rubbed it continuously +- His
rubbing it continued. Unfairly is of fact or of manner, depending on the verb:
He tipped them off unfairly +- That he tipped them off was unfair; He divided
the gifts unfairly +- His dividing of the gifts was unfair (in manner). However,
we can find for these adverbs certain free variants of them which are not
restricted:
He pronounced my name in an unexpected manner.
He rubbed it in a continuous manner.
He tipped them offin an unfair manner.
In all these cases in A manner ~ Aly (writing A for adjective). The restriction
of particular A, to being manner-adverbs or other adverbs, is therefore not
in the increment in A manner, which is available for all adjectives within
selectional dependence upon the verb, but in the paraphrastic change
in ... manner -+ -ly which is used only for adjectives that are characteristically manner, or are such for the given verb.
Furthermore, although of is required as above when manner is absent, we
find nominalization without of when manner is present: His driving of the car
is slow in manner, His driving the car is slow in manner, The manner of his
driving ofthe car is slow, The manner of his driving the car is slow; ~ His driving
the car is slow. Here we have a free variant of A of manner which is not
restricted to of; the restriction to of occurs for the paraphrastic reduction
of in ... manner -+ -ly.
2.4. Subjunctive

In English the subjunctive occurs under certain operators: under operators
on sentence, e.g. I request that he go there (as contrasted with I deny that he
goes there (or will go»; and in the second operand of conjunctions on sentencepairs, e.g. I won't go for fear (or: lest) he go there as contrasted with I won't
go because he goes there (or will go). It thus appears as a grammatical property restricted to these and perhaps other situations. However, we can find free

304

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

variants in which these operators appear without the subjunctive: I request
his going there, no different from I deny his going there; and My not going is
for fear of his going there, no different from My not going is because of his
going there. Hence the increments of the class of the sentence-operator
request and of the conjunction for fear are not restricted to occurring on the
subjunctive form of their operand sentence. The domain restriction comes in
later, in the paraphrastic free variant of the type
I request his going ~ I request that he go.

This transformation operates not on all N's Ving under sentence operators
and conjunctions, but only for the ones under a subdomain of sentenceoperators and conjunctions: specifically in English those sentence-operators
and conjunctions in which the time-location adverb of the operand sentence
is dependent upon the time-location adverb of the sentence-operator or the
primary sentence preceding the conjunction.
For deny, the time-location adverb of the operand sentence is independent:
I denied yesterday that he went the day before yesterday.
I denied yesterday that he will go tomorrow.
I will deny tomorrow that he went yesterday.
I will deny tomorrow that he will go the day after tomorrow.

But for request, the time-location adverb of the operand sentence always
indicates a later time than that of request; or, less specifically, the operand
sentence can be viewed as always containing a (zeroable) time-order adverb
afterwards or subsequently:
I requested the day before yesterday that he go yesterday (or:
that he go afterwards).
I requested yesterday that he go tomorrow (or: that he go
afterwards).
I will request tomorrow that he go the day after tomorrow (or:
that he go afterwards).
~ I requested yesterday that he go the day before yesterday.
~ I will request tomorrow that he go yesterday.
Similarly, for because we have independent time-adverbs:
I went yesterday because he went the day before yesterday.
I went yesterday because he will go tomorrow.
I will go tomorrow because he went yesterday.
I will go tomorrow because he will go the day after tomorrow.
But forfor fear or lest the second is dependent upon the first:

305

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

I went the day before yesterday lest he go yesterday (or: afterwards).
I went yesterday lest he go tomorrow (or: afterwards).
I will go tomorrow lest he go the day after tomorrow (or: afterwards).
~ I went yesterday lest he go the day before yesterday.
~ I will go tomorrow lest he go yesterday.
We see then that the paraphrastic free variant transformation from N's Ving
to that NV (the subjunctive) occurs in operand sentences under those operators which impose a time-location dependence upon the operand (or which,
equivalently, always permit the word subsequently (or: afterwards) in their
operand). There are, of course, various details which are omitted here. There
are some verbs, e.g. request, whose operand always contains afterwards and
which never have a tense on their argument. There are some which take
afterwards usually but perhaps not always, and which may therefore sometimes appear with a tensed argument: I suggest that he go, I suggest that he
possibly went by himself (or: I suggest that he might have gone by himself).
There are some verbs which have both the afterwards and the tensed arguments: I insist that he go, I insist that he went. In some cases the tensed argument may be of a variant of the untensed: I prefer that he go, I prefer that he
went now. In other languages, the subjunctive is determined by morphemes
expressing possibility, not only by morphemes (such as afterwards) expressing
time-order.
2.5. Time-Conjunctions

If we consider the time-ordering conjunctions before, alter, until, since, while,
etc., we find complex restrictions as to the tenses of the verbs which they
connect. It has been shown 6 that if certain compound tenses and verbs are
characterized as being either perfective or else imperfective, these restrictions
can be organized into a few readily stateable requirements, e.g. that the verb
following before or after be perfective (while the verb preceding the conjunction can be either perfective or imperfective), and that either both verbs be
past or else both verbs be future. (The present tense which is replaceable by a
synonymous future tense is considered here as future.) Thus we have:
(1)
(2)

But
(3)
(4)

He returned (yesterday) before she arrived (yesterday).
He will return (tomorrow) before she arrives (tomorrow) (or:
will arrive).
~ He will return (tomorrow) before she arrived (yesterday).
~ He returned (yesterday) before she will

arrive (tomorrow).

306

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

It should be noted that while (3) could be said to be excluded as having an

impossible meaning, (4) is perfectly reasonable but grammatically excluded.
As in the preceding cases, it turns out that the language contains free
variants which are not restricted, and which are related to (1)-(4) by known
paraphrastic transformations:

(5)!
(6)

His return yesterday was before her arrival yesterday.
His return tomorrow will be before her arrival tomorrow.
His return tomorrow will be before her arrival yesterday.
His return yesterday was (or: will have been) before her arrival
tomorrow.

The tenses in (1)-(4) correlate with the time-location adverbs of their verbs.
But whereas before is restricted to certain tense-pairs, be before is not
restricted by the time-location pairs whose tenses would have restricted
before. The time-relation which was reasonable but grammatically excluded
in (4) is acceptable for be before (6). And the time-relation which was unreasonable and grammatically excluded in (3) is not grammatically excluded
though still unreasonable here (5). In (5), as in the case of be-ing, we have
found for a form which is grammatically restricted a free variant which is
only selectionally restricted; and, as for be-ing, the selectional restriction is
changeable due to new sentence-environments or cultural contexts: (5) can
indeed be contained in such a sentence as Godel's backward-running time
could make one's return tomorrow be before one's arrival yesterday. Thus before
plus tense is a free variant of be before over part of the domain of be before:
The subdomain is characterized by both of the time-location adverbs under
be before being such as determine the past tense, or both determining the
future tense, and by the second verb being perfective.
It further turns out that all the other (,time-ordering') conjunctions which
have such tense and perfectivity restrictions are free variants (preserving
acceptability-ordering) of other subdomains of be before plus certain additions. First, be after plus reflection of operands in the operator (the operand
interchange, 8.1 (8)) is a free variant of be before over its whole domain:
Her arrival yesterday was after his return yesterday.
Her arrival tomorrow will be after his return yesterday.
Then, after plus tense plus reflecting the two operands in the operator is a
free variant of be before over the following subdomain: the time-location
adverbs are as for before, and the first verb (under be before) must be perfective. When both verbs are perfective we can form out of
His return was before her arrival

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

307

both
He returned before she arrived
and
She arrived after he returned.
When only the second is perfective, then from
His continuing to work was before her arrival
we can form
He continued to work before she arrived
but not
~ She arrived after he continued to work.

And when only the first is perfective, then from
Her arrival was before his continuing to work
we can form
He continued to work after she arrived
but not
~ She arrived before he continued to work.

The other time-ordering conjunctions can also be shown to be free variants,
over other subdomains, of be before plus more complex additions.
The sentences containing be before have many other free variants. One of
these makes a desirable source. It is the form in which be before is simply a
verb between two time-nouns:
His return at 3 P.M. was before her arrival at 3: 15 P.M.
His return at the hour of 3 P.M. was before her arrival at the
hourof3: 15 P.M.
(7)

3 P.M., which was the hour of his return, is before 3: 15 P.M.,
which was the hour of her arrival.

Each of the first two sentences is derivable from the one below it by known
paraphrastic transformations. In (7) we see finally that one of the free variants
is different in an important respect: instead of be before as a connective verb
(transformable into a conjunction) between two nominalized sentences containing time-location adverbs, we now have be before as a verb between
time-nouns, and two wh-conjunctions connecting two sentences with time
adverbs to these time-nouns.
The source of (7) is :
(8)
(9)

(The hour of) 3 P.M. is before (the hour of) 3: 15 P.M.
His return was at (the hour of) 3 P.M.

308

(10)

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

Her arrival was at (the hour of) 3: 15 P.M.

with (9) and (10) being each joined to (8) by wh-.
In the case oftime-connectives without time-location adverbs, e.g. in
His return was before her arrival
we have to assume that the source contained unspecified time-predicates:
(8')
(9')
(10')

A time is before a time.
His return in the past was at a time.
Her arrival in the past was at a time.

If we operate on the ordered (9'), (10') with two wh- operators (themselves
derived from and) on the successive time of (8'), we obtain (with automatic
the):

(11)

The time of his return in the past was before the time of her
arrival in the past.

Zeroing the time of as a constant in respect to be before, we obtain:
(12)

His return in the past was before her arrival in the past,

whence by tense-transplacing and second-operand tensing (which make a
conjunction out of the verb be before 5.5,8.1 (10), (12»:
(13)

He returned before she arrived.

If the time and perfectivity conditions for the tense-transplacing are not

satisfied, the conjunction form as in (13) is not reached. Furthermore, if
the two source sentences under the wh- (i.e. (9') and (10') here) do not have
past or future (from is in past, is infuture predicates) the derivation cannot
reach (13) and we are left with
His return is before her arrival.
In (8)-(i0) and (8')-(10') we see how the whole system of inter-sentence timeconnectives can turn out to be a free variant of one verb, be before (or precede)
on time-nouns, plus the wh-connective.
2.6. Comparatives

A somewhat similar situation arises in the case of the comparative. The comparative has certain grammatical restrictions. It involves not only a conjunction between two sentences but also a comparative morpheme placed next
to a particular word (the one in respect to which the comparison is being
made) in the first sentence 7 :
(1)

More men read books than women (read) magazines.

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

(2)

309

Men read more books than women (read) magazines.

In the second operand sentence of each pair, there are unique zeroings
(discussed below), which are seen in, e.g.:
(3)
(4)
(5)

More men read books than read magazines.
Men read more books than (they read) magazines.
Men read more books than are worthwhile.

but no zeroing in:
(6)

More men read books than there are books which are worthwhile.

After zeroing, the than ... can be permuted, but not to before the comparison-bearing word in the first sentence:
(7a)
(7b)
(7c)

More men read books than women (do).
More men than women read books.
Men read more books than women (read).
~ Men than women read more books.

Finally, the comparative is restricted in repetition. In the case of other conjunctions (except wh-), if a conjunction C has operated on a pair of sentences
S1> S2, yielding a new sentence SI CS2, it can then operate on a further pair
consisting of this resultant and a third sentence: (SI CS2)CS 3 or S3C(SI CS 2):
(He left because it was late) because he had to be back in time.
In contrast, the comparative repeats only on pairs of pairs, yielding (SI CS2)
C(S3CS4):
(8)

He is richer than she more than you are richer than me.

but ~ (SI CS 2 )CS 3:
(9)

~ He is richer than she more than you are (rich).

There are many free variants to the comparative form. One in particular
turns out to be free of the various restrictions ofthe comparative conjunction.
We consider, for
(10)

He is richer than she (is).

the free variant (via (1 0") below) :
(10')

The amount of his riches is more than the amount of her riches.

or with morphophonemic exceed for be more than:
The amount of his riches exceeds the amount of her riches.

310

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

On the basis of (10') we can form a free variant to (8):
(11)

The excess of (the amount of) his riches over hers exceeds the
excess of (the amount of) your riches over mine.

And here we can also form (S1 CS 2 )CS 3 , which was impossible in (9):
(12)

The excess of (the amount of) his riches over hers exceeds (the
amount of) your riches.

In the new form we have no comparative conjunction: As in (8)-(10) of
2.5, (10') is formed out of a certain elementary sentence form (13) plus two
sentences connected to (13) by the wh-connective:
(13)

Ni is more than N j (by N k),

where Ni> N j , Nk are any numbers; or they may be pronouns and classifiers
of the numbers, such as the words number, amount, degree. To (13) are
joined (by wh-):

(14)
(15)

N; is the amount of his riches +- His riches amount to N;.
N j is the amount of her riches +- Her riches amount to N j •

The result of connecting (14) and (15) by wh- to (13) is:
N;, which is the amount of his riches is more than N j , which is
the amount of her riches.
As in (8')-(10') of 2.5, we can form this set also when the nouns of (13) are
unspecified quantities, if we allow these further nouns to be subject and object of is more than:
(13')
(14')
(15')

An amount is more than an amount (by an amount).
His riches have an amount.
Her riches have an amount.

When (14'), (15') are each connected by wh- to (13'), and addressed respectively to the first two occurrences of amount, we obtain (comparably to
(11)-(13) of2.5):
(10')

The amount of his riches is more than the amount of her riches.

and, by zeroing of the amount ofas a constant of is more than:
(10")

His riches are more than her riches (or: than hers).

and by tense-transplacing, second-operand tensing, and zeroing we obtain the
comparative conjunction:
(10)

He is richer than she.

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

311

The source set of type (13)-(15), (13')-(15') explains the special zeroing of the comparative conjunction. In this source there is under the second
wh- (i.e. in the (I5)-type sentence) an established zeroing of repeated material in positions corresponding to their antecedents in the (14)-type sentence. Thus from
Nh which is the (number of) men who read books, in more than
N j , which is the (number of) men who read magazines
we obtain by zeroing of the indefinite N i , N j and of parallel repetitions:
The (number of) men who read books, is more than read magazines.
Here operand interchange under wh- yields the somewhat dubious:
Men read books who are more than read magazines.
With zeroing of who are and permuting of more to the left of its host (8.4(6)):
(3)

More men read books than read magazines.

The permutation of 8.4 (6) can operate not on more alone but also on more
than read magazines (i.e. on more together with its adjunct), yielding:
More men than read magazines read books.
The fact that than ... is never permuted to before more (see (7) above) is
due to the fact that the permutation operates on than ... only as right adjunct
of more. It is more that is permutable, and than ... only with it.
Similarly, from a source
Nh which is the (number of) books which men read, is more than
N j , which is the (number of) magazines which men read
we obtain (4) via
The books which men read are more than the magazines (which
they read).
And from a source
N;, which is the (number of) books which are read, is more than
N j which is the (number of) books that are worthwhile
we obtain (5) via
The books which men read are more than are worthwhile.
And from a source
N" which is the (number of) men who read books, is more than
N j , which is the (number of) books that are worthwhile

312

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

we obtain (6) via
The men who read books are more than the books that are
worthwhile.
The wh- on two operand sentences with a common N always brings the
common N in its second operand to the start of the second operand, where it
is pronouned onto the wlt-. The common N in (l3)-(15) is always a quantity
(as the common N in (8)-(10) of 2.5 is always a time-noun), and the noun
which bears the quantity is automatically brought up after it (by the string
effect of wh-, 2.8, 8.4 (6». It is this that puts the compared (quantified) word
at the start and that determines what are the corresponding positions for
zeroing. When the tense-transplacing and second-operand tensing make the
verb is more than into a conjunction than, the operand sentences undergo
a string change and the compared word may no longer be at the start.
Note that for (6) the second books is not zeroable under the source wltbecause it is not in a position corresponding to that ofthe first books, whereas
for (5) the second books was in a corresponding position and zeroable. The
(l3)-(15)-type of source shows that the comparative has not merely one compared word, the bearer of more in the first compared sentence (i.e. the word
quantified by N j ), but also a second compared word, in the second sentence
(i.e. the word quantified by N j ). The zeroing rules under the comparative
conjunction, which seem complex and unique, turn out to be almost entirely
the normal zeroings under wh- in the source form shown here.
Like all paraphrases in this paper, these transformations are not semantically determined equivalences but established transformations, preserving
acceptability-ordering. And the intermediate sentences in the derivation, and
the source sentences in (l3)-(15), exist in the language, even if they are felt to
be cumbersome. It should also be noted that the precise form of the elementary sentences, and precisely which paraphrastic transformations are to be
used in the derivation, need not concern us in the present problem, though
they would concern a detailed grammar of English. All that is important here
is that the comparative conjunction, like the time-order conjunctions, can be
paraphrastically derived from an elementary sentence form and the whconnective, and that the source forms do not have the restrictions in domain
or in further operability which the derived forms have. The special properties
of the comparative are thus merely the result of a few established transformations operating on this unrestricted source.
The discussion above shows that the comparative conjunction has a free
variant, in the (13)-(15) source form, which does not have the grammatical
peculiarities of the comparative: it does not have a comparative marker
which has to be placed in the first operand sentence; its zeroings and permu-

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

313

tations are mostly the normal ones for the source form; and it is not restricted
as to repetition or other further transformability. Also, the source form is
semantically more explicit, in that it naturally distinguishes a quantified (and
compared) word in the second operand sentence as well as in the first.
As in other cases, we find that many sentences can be said in the source
form which cannot be said (or can be said only by some special adjustment)
in the more common derived form. These are the sentences which are excluded by the restrictions that are required for the paraphrastic derived form.
Thus, we have seen in (12) that we could form the source for the (SCS)CS
comparison, where the short form (9) was excluded: (12) resulted from joining
three sentences to the N i , Nj, Nk of (13). If only one sentence, say (14), is
adjoined by wh- to (13) we obtain (ifNj is, say, $5.):
(16)

The amount of his riches is more than $ 5.

or:
His riches exceed $ 5.
where, as in (9) the comparative-conjunction form does not exist:
(17)

~ He is richer than $ 5.

We find additional source sentences which lack a comparative-conjunction
paraphrase if we note the zeroings involved in (1)-(7). In all these cases, the
source proposed here has zero able material: identical words in parallel
positions. Thus the source of (1) would be:
(I 8)

The number of men who read books is more than the number of
women who read magazines.

And the source of (2) is:
(19)

The number of books which men read is more than the number
of magazines which women read.

In these and the other cases the quantified words have the same position in
the source sentences, so that the two wh- clauses in (18), or in (19), have
identical structures. s If, however, we take a sentence of this type in which the
two wh- clauses have different structures, we find that in certain cases the
direct comparative-conjunction form does not exist:

The number of men who read books is more than the number
of magazines which women read.
~ More men read books than magazines women read. 9

314

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

Similarly, for
The number of books which men read is more than the number
of women who read books.
~ Men read more books than women who read books.
To summarize the situation for the comparative: We have found that there is
an incremental system, not restricted to any subdomain, which consists of
any sentence of the elementary form (13) to which are joined by wh- any
sentences with quantity-predicates as in (14), (15). Under certain conditions,
when there are certain parallelisms (which may be due to zeroings) in the
sentences joined to (13), the section preceding than is transformed into a
sentence, and than becomes a conjunction. It is this last transformation, a
paraphrastic one, which is restricted; and certain source-sets of the (13)-(15)type cannot receive this transformation.
The comparative with less than is readily obtained from more than. And
the as ... as comparative can also be obtained from more than; or is as
3. UNRESTRICTED MORPHOPHONEMIC SOURCE FOR RESTRICTED
OPERATORS

In § 2 we saw that many incremental operators with restricted domain had,
over their own domain, free variants whose domain in turn was not restricted.
There remain certain operators which do not have unrestricted free variants,
but which nevertheless permit the formulation of an unrestricted source.
This is possible first of all in the case of two or more forms which are complementary in their environments: in that case it has become customary to
define a morphophonemic source, which does not exist in at least certain of
the environments (where it is marked *), and to say that the morphophonemic source occurs in all environments, except that where it is marked * it is
automatically (necessarily) changed in shape into the form that is indeed
found there. This is done not only in individual cases such as knife-knives and
in more prominent situations such as irregular verbs (be, etc.), but also in
many paradigmatic situations such as number and gender agreement, and
conjugations.
The morphophonemic source can stilI be formulated secondly, in a more
complicated situation: when two forms contrast in some environments but
are complementary in others. This situation, which in phonemics was called
neutralization, is uncomfortable if we seek to state what are the independent
elements in all sentences. The situation arises, for example, in gender if some
nouns are only feminine, e.g. la riviere, while other nouns have both masculine and feminine forms, e.g. Ie lion, fa lionne. In this case the feminine endings
on riviere and the words in the scope of its agreement have to be considered

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

315

to be simply phonemic portions of riviere, while the feminine ending in
lionne is a morpheme (in effect an adjective) independently adjoinable to lion.
3.1. Plural

A clear case of this neutralization is the plural affix. In The books fell as
against The book fell, the -s is an independent morpheme, in effect an adjective. In Three books fell the -s is not independent: ~ Three book fell, and
books is a complementary variant of book in this environment. We can avoid
this situation by noting that for every N pl. (noun plus plural suffix), in every
environment where it has no quantifier, there is a free variant containing an
indefinite plural pronoun, e.g. two-or-more N pl. :
I need books.
I need two-or-more books.
We consider a subset of English which has all English sentences except that
instead of each sentence containing unquantified N pl., it has the corresponding sentence with two-or-more N pl. In this subset, the plural suffix is never
independent: it is always determined by such quantifiers as two, three, many,
two-or-more. We now replace all the cases of two books, many books, two-ormore books, etc., by a newly created morphophonemic source *two book,
*many book, *two-or-more book, etc. In English, the plural suffix is a restricted increment, not occurring after one N. But in the above subset of
English with its morphophonemic source there is no independent plural
morpheme: There are only various quantifiers one, two, many, two-or-more,
and each of these is unrestricted; and there is a pronunciation two books for
the source *two book, etc. The restricted plural is now no longer due to
adding a restricted increment; rather, it is due to restricted morphophonemics, which pronounces the phonemes of pl. after certain quantifiers but not
after one, half, etc., and it is due to the zeroing of a particular quantifier once
this morphophonemic pI. was present, thus producing out of two-or-more
N pl. a free variant N pl.
It is not necessary to suppose that every noun without pl. is singular,
either in meaning or grammatically. In the grammar, the category 'singular'
is no longer relevant (nor is 'plural' except as the domain of a particular
morphophonemic change). In meaning, there is no reason to consider unpluralized mass-nouns as either singular or plural: e.g. in water, or even
much water, more water; while the waters has to be considered as +- *the
two-or-more water.
3.2. Tense

A similar but more complex case is that of tense. The tense of a verb is

316

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

dependent on the time-location adverb of that verb: I went yesterday. ~ I went
tomorrow. But tense occurs also as an independent element on verbs lacking
a time-location adverb: I went. I will go. Again we have neutralization. As
above, we can find a free variant with general time-location adverb for every
tensed verb which lacks a time-location adverb, and we consider the latter
to be zeroed from the former:
He went. +- He went in the past (or: before now).
He will go. +- He will go in the future (or: after now).
He goes. +- He goes at present (or: now).
In the longer forms above the tense is always dependent, so that these can be
derived from untensed morphophonemic sources, or nominalization:
*He go in the past; or: His going is in the past.
*He go in the future; or: His going is in the future.
*He go at present; or: His going is at present.
In these source sentences the morphophonemically automatic be does not
have to be was or will be; and its form is is clearly no indication of present
time (which would be meaningless here) but is a morphophonemic requirement.
In sentences without time-location adverb (this can occur only when the
sentences are operands), and in particular in the sentences as they are about
to be nominalized under time-location predicates as immediately above, we
cannot have had a tensed source. Here the tenseless morphophonemic form
must have been the source: *He go. Semantically, the time of such forms is
indefinite or indeterminate, rather than being some kind of generalized
present.
Timeless source sentences actually exist as operands. In My going may turn
out to be a great mistake there is no indication of the time of my going, and
there is no reason to say that this sentence is a degenerate grammatical ambiguity from precisely three sources: My going in the past may ... , My going in
the future may ... , My going at present may .... The same timeless operand
sentence is seen in I returned because of his departure. It would go against the
conditions necessary for zeroing to derive ... because of his departure from
... because he departed or from ... because he will depart, since such a derivation would losct time-information, whereas morphemes are zeroed only if
they can be reconstructed from the remaining environment (although two
different zeroings may yield degenerately the same residual sentence). Hence
I returne~ because he will depart is a transform of I returned because of his
future departure and not of I returned because of his departure; the latter has
no tensed transform for the second operand.

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

317

Tenseless operand forms exist for every operator: no operator in English
requires a tensed V as argument. Those for which the operand can be tensed,
also have a tenseless form of the operand as in I regret his departure, They
made him leave. This explains why every tensed operand has a tenseless
apparent transform but not conversely: (1) That he went is afact, (2) His
going is afact; His driving is slow, ~ That he drives is slow. For we now see
that (1) is a transform not of (2) but of His going (being) in the past is a fact.
But is slow does not operate on time predicates: His driving in the past was
slow is derived not from is slow on is in the past, but from and on the two
increments is in the past, is slow, producing His driving which was in the past
was slow, His past driving was slow. Hence is slow has only tenseless operands,
while is a fact has both tensed and tenseless.
The occurrence of tensed forms can be described as a free variant or automatic change (required variant) of time-location adverbs; but doing so requires a rather complicated statement of, first, when this variant occurs and,
second, which tense goes with which particular adverbs.

4. RESTRICTION DETERMINED BY ENVIRONMENT
In § 2 it was seen that certain increments which appeared to be restricted to
particular subsets of the domain of a variable could be derived from unrestricted increments. In § 3 it was seen that certain other restricted operators
were variants determined by the presence of other operators, i.e. of particular
morphemes in the environment (e.g. quantifiers or time adverbs). Here we
consider how yet other grammatical forms, which appear to be restricted to
words of some particular subset, are derivable as variants of particular morphemes which are present in the environment of words of that subset.
What is eliminated in § 4 is mostly restrictions on certain paraphrastic
transformations, rather than on increments. However, the elimination of
these restrictions requires certain added complexities in the source form of
the increments upon which the transformations operate (e.g. 4.1, 4.3), and
it is therefore being considered here.

4.1. Subjunctive
This type of situation has already been met in the subjunctive (2.4), where
the non-tensing of the operand was due to a particular dependence between
the time-adverb of the operand and that ofthe operator.
It was seen there that all sentences containing this time dependence had as
one of their free variant transforms a sentence which contained the statement
of that time-dependence: subsequently, or afterwards, or the like. In the formulation of grammar there is a great difference between saying that the sub-

318

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

junctive occurs in the operands of verbs that necessarily (or normally) have
this time-dependence to them, and saying that the subjunctive occurs in the
operands of those verbs that necessarily (or normally) impose the word
afterwards on them. For in the latter case, we can simply say that the subjunctive is a free variant of the required afterwards; and the required afterwards can be considered as simply a part of those verbs which always impose
it on their arguments. It is true that the requirement of afterwards can be
considered a classifier of a subset of words, but it can also be considered a
morphemic segment of those verbs and thus simply a part of the sentences in
which those verbs occur, a part that can be replaced by free variants of it.
Then the source form of request would be request-for-afterwards.
The analysis of afterwards will be clearer if we use here the operator notation of §§ 6-7 (see note 1), in which X(y, Z) indicates that X is operating on
the pair Y, Z as its arguments; in elementary sentences the verb is taken as
operating on its subject and object (7.1). Then I request that he go is in operator notation:
request-for-afterwards (I, go (he»,
and in the actual string of words (7.5):
*1 request-for-afterwards his going
which becomes by length-permutation (8.1 (6»:
I request his going afterwards,
where the presence of the required afterwards prevents the morphophonemic
operation of tensing and leaves a tenseless transform
I request that he go (afterwards).

4.2. Adverbs of Manner
The appeal to environment has also been met in the predicates of manner
(2.3), which were seen to be derived from adjectives (in principle, arbitrary
ones) plus the word manner: (1) His driving of trucks was hesitant +- (2) His
driving (of) trucks was in a hesitant manner - The manner of his driving (of)
trucks was hesitant. What makes them adverbs of manner is that the words
in ... manner had occurred with them, but were zeroable and zeroed. Furthermore, since the nominalization with of before the object (1) is required
only when manner is absent, we see that the requirement is a variant of
manner: (1) and (2) are free variants of each other. And indeed the verbs
which have manner as object (not as part of a predicate) also have this ofnominalization when manner is zeroed: They imitated the manner of his

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

319

driving (of) trucks, They imitated his driving of trucks. Of course, in order to
determine the special transformation (in this case, of), the determining environment (in this case, manner), if it is zeroed, must be present at the moment
of application of the special transformation.
4.3. Reciprocals

Free variation to environing morphemes is seen in the case of the reciprocal
verbs. For all verbs, a sentence of the form:
A saw Band B saw A
can be transformed into:
A and B saw B and A respectively.
which transforms into:
(1)

A and B saw each other.

each other can be paraphrastically zeroed:

(2)
(3)

A met Band B met A.
A and B met B and A respectively.
A and B met each other.
A and B met.

In such a derivation, the zeroing of each other in (2) but not in (1) is determined by the presence of met in (2) as against saw in (1): that is, the determining environment is a particular subset of words, the reciprocal verbs,
v'w which have to be listed.
However, there is another way of arriving at (3) which has the same grammatical character as in 4.1. We note that the reciprocal verbs, for which (3)
occurs in the sense only of each other, are precisely the verbs v'ec for which
(4)

(4')

A v,.ec B and A's Vrecing B implies B's Vrecing A.
A Vrec B and that A and B Vrec B and A respectively is implicit.

are transforms of
as in:
A met B and that A and B met B and A respectively is implicit.
Therefore the sentence:
AmetBandBmetA
~ A and B met B and A respectively

320

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

has various transforms of the type (pronouned from (4'»:
(5)

A and B met B and A respectively, and this is implicit.

Of course, this is not to say that (4) may not occur for verbs not in V,ee, when
they have particular A, B or particular conditions (which could be appended
to the sentence): e.g. in a given situation we might have (6) He saw her and
his seeing her implied her seeing him. But (6) would not be a transform of
He saw her, preserving acceptability-ordering for all choices of subject and
object.
We can now say that what is zero able is the transformational case (as in
(4') but not (6» of B and A respectively and this is implicit, which indeed
meets the informationlessness criterion for zeroing. To zero this segment
requires no appeal to a determining environment. (3) is then derived not
from (2) but from (5).
At this point one might think that all that has been gained is a shifting of
the definition of the V,ec subset, from a subset defined by a list to one defined
by having the transforms (4). However, the difference is that now the reduced
form (3) is derived by zeroing the zeroable material in (5) and not from any
checking of the environment; but the cost is that the source form of met
is now as in (5). The Yr.c can occur without the adjoined implication of (4)
and (5), and in that case the zeroing does not take place; in that case the
Vrec can only reach the form with each other, in which it does not differ from
any other verb. Furthermore, as in 2.4, the availability of (4), (5) is not as
sharp a grammatical restriction as would be thought from the listed Yr.c.
There are verbs, e.g. equal, which are fully acceptable in forms (4) and (5),
and can with hesitation be used in form (3). As before, the source forms have
some freedom in selection of co-occurrents, while the paraphrastically
shortened forms (3) are frozen into grammatical sUbjects. Here as elsewhere
(e.g. 2.1), what is sharply grammatical in the transformational paraphrase
system is derived from what is flexibly selectional (co-occurrence) in the
source sentences.

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

321

5. PREDICATIONAL SOURCE FOR INCREMENTS
5.0. Introduction

The attempt in § 2 to reformulate restrictions and subsets by finding
free or automatic variants to the various increments has in many cases
turned up variants which had the form, in respect to the rest of the sentence,
of a predicate operating on sentences. The term 'predicate' is used here to
indicate verb or its linguistic equivalent: e.g. in the order of appearance
above be in process, be to great extent, be of slow manner (have slow manner),
be easy, demand, be before (precede), be more than (exceed), be in past, imply.

In all these cases the predicational form could be considered the source,
from which the other forms are paraphrastically derived, so that the grammatical restrictions are on the paraphrase, not on the source. This raises the
question whether every increment has a variant form that is a predicate,
which could then be taken as source even if no restrictional advantages are
gained thereby. If there was a single relative position in the sentence, such
that all increments could be derived paraphrastically from operators having
that position relative to their operand, it would be convenient for the simplicity of a theory oflanguage, and it would show that all other syntactic relations are merely paraphrases of the single relation in the source. This is all
the more important when the source is largely restrictionless and yet carries
all the objective information carried in language. For then we can see that a
single relation of certain argument-specific operators to their arguments
suffices to carry the objective information. We therefore consider for each
increment the set of free (or automatic) variants which it has,12 and we
survey all the sets to see if there is some one form which is to be found in
every set - preferably the form in which the operator is a predicate in the
above sense. If in a given set of variants (transforms) we do not find such a
form, we will try to see at what morphophonemic or other cost a variant of
this form can be added to the set.
In what follows, many of the attempts to derive increments from a predicate source will seem forced. Some derivations from predicate form have
grammatical justification, even if they are not entirely obvious: the moods
(5.6) and most of the noun-adjuncts (5.1), verb-adjuncts (5.2), and auxiliaries
(5.3). The remaining noun-adjuncts (chiefly quantifiers, the) and verbadjuncts are few and special. It can be argued that there is good reason to
try to regularize them (to predicate form), and that relevant classifications
are brought to light in the process (e.g. about all, the). However, one might
claim that even if this is the case there is no point in forcing the verboperators (e.g. begin, take a) and subordinate conjunctions into the framework of predicates. These are major distinct constructions of grammar, and

322

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

it seems quite unreal to derive them from uncomfortable or non-existent
predicates. Even the fact that many verb-operators occur also as predicates,
and that many subordinate conjunctions have associated verb forms, does
not alter the grammatical specialness of these non-predicate forms.
However, the intention in this chapter is not to claim that the predicates
are sources in any sense except the very special one used here, namely that
the established transformations plus a heavy use of morphophonemics
suffice to produce all the increments out of predicate forms, and that often
these forms are clear syntactic sources in that they are less restricted as to
domain or further operability. Thus aside from the standard paraphrastic
transformations, the only difference between the normal sentences and the
predicate system is morphophonemic, i.e. is in phonemic shape and position.
The implications for information, and for the relation of information to
syntactic structure, are obvious.
When we can show that no more than one type of operator-operand relation is needed for language, we can deduce one of the major properties of
language computability. When grammar is presented with several kinds of
operators - adverbs, conjunctions, etc. - it is clear that there are restrictions
on the operator combinations, and that these restrictions preserve a certain
connectedness among the sentence-parts. For example, I clearly remember
its being put in service with great to-do is transformable to I remember its
being put in service with great to-do with clarity, but not to I remember its
being put in service with clarity with great to-do. The lines connecting remember
to its adjunct with clarity and connecting put in service with its adjunct with
great to-do cannot cross. This does not have to be presented as a special
condition on sentence-construction. For when all the segments in a sentence
are seen to be brought in by a single type of incremental operator, we see
that this connectedness is due to the fact that in each sentence-construction
the single operator-type can bring in the segments in only one order.
The predicate source is possible because the different morphological and
apparently syntactic classes of words - adjectives, subordinate conjunctions,
etc. - do not have different combinability in the language than do particular
classes of predicates that can be considered to correspond to them. There is
no noun-adjunct that cannot be paraphrased by a conjoined sentence containing that noun, nor any subordinate-conjunction-sentence which cannot
be paraphrased by a sentence-pair with an inter-sentence verb. So many
grammatical constructions turn out to be derivable from predicates, and so
many difficult constructions are conveniently explainable in this derivation,
that the syntactic relation here is clearly not external to the language. The
predicate sources are not morphologically simple. Since the syntax of a
language describes the combinings and relative positionings of elements in

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

323

sentences, we see that the predicate sources are syntactic primitives and not
morphological ones, and they represent (by paraphrastic transformation and
morphophonemics) all the morphemes of no matter what morphological class
which have identical combinability relative to other morphemes. Just as
phonemes are not necessarily phonetically simple, so the syntactic elements
determined here are not necessarily morphologically simple, though many
of them are.
5.1. Noun Adjuncts

We first note briefly the primitive adjuncts of nouns: the, all, many, only,
etc. The adjuncts, other than these, of a noun N j are all derived from predicates of another sentence whose subject is also N;, the second sentence having been adjoined by wh- (2.8) to the given occurrence of N j: The heavy
book fell +- The book which is heavy fell +- wh- (The book fell, The book is
heavy). The numbers and some of the quantifiers can also be derived in this
way: Five booksfell +- Books which numberedfivefell +- wh- (Books numbered
five, Booksfell); although at a later stage the numbers could be derived from
repetitions (under and) of the singular sentences.
Indefinite and universal quantifiers such as all cannot be derived from
some number of repetitions under and, nor do they appear by themselves
as predicates of the nouns to which they are adjoined: ~ The men are all.

However, these quantifiers carry explicit or implicit (i.e. zeroed) references
to a domain over which they are taken; and indeed these quantifiers can be
derived from appropriate predicates connecting their noun to this domain.
E.g. for all: All the men in the room left +- Men comprising the set in the
room left: All books must be returned +- All books which have been taken
must be returned (or the like) +- Books covering the set of those which have
been taken must be returned; All men die +- Men exhausting the set of (what
is called) men die. The permutability of all (Men all die; Men die, all of them)

supports such a derivation.
As to the, there may be several sources, from one or another of which
we can derive each occurrence of the, according to its environment. 13 Certain cases of the are automatic in the presence of certain adjuncts of the
noun. Others are free variant replacements for such adjuncts as which has
just been mentioned.

5.2. Verb Adjuncts

There are a few adverbs of degree which do not have predicate transforms:
I quite forgot,· I simply forgot (=1= My forgetting was simp/e). As in the case of
very (2.2), these can be derived from synonymous predicate-transformable

adverbs of degree or conjoined clauses which satisfy the conditions for being

324

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

free variants of them: e.g. quite from completely, simply from without qualification.
Almost all adverbs have predicate transforms. That the predicate forms
are the source has been shown from 2.3 and from the fact that adverbs
generally operate semantically on all adverbs which are between them and
the verb: Each adverb arose as a predicate operating on the previous adverbial predicate: He has been writing clearly recently. ~ His writing clearly has
been recent. ~ His writing being clear has been recent.
A special problem exists in the case of not. S-+ not S is an incremental
transformation: Not only does it derive one sentence from another, but it
preserves subject-matter context (The values approach infinity and The values
do not approach infinity occur in the same subject-matter sublanguage); and
like all incremental transformations it preserves acceptability-ordering over
a large subdomain (The flower fell and The flower did not fall, as against The
flower thundered and The flower did not thunder).
First, we note that all negatives are derivable from not on the verb (i.e. in
the sentence). Thus We lost no time ~ We did not lose (even a little) time;
and non occurs more acceptably on predicate nouns (e.g. non-student, derived
from a verb) than on primitive operand nouns (such as chair). Secondly, not
too much morphophonemics is involved in deriving not as adjunct on verb
from tis not as predicate on sentence. Such a derivation is indeed needed for
It is not that Sl (but that S2), which has to be derived ~ *That Sl is not, by
the well-established transformation seen in It is false that he came ~ That he
came isfalse.
If tis not is taken as a predicate which operates on sentence we find that
its further transformations are similar to those of other sentence-operators,
except for morphophonemic details. E.g. when we operate with an additional
increment, say may help, on these sentence-operators we obtain:
*My driving is not. --+ My not driving may help.
My driving is (in the) future. --+ My future driving may help.
My driving is slow. --+ My slow driving may help.
Aside from this, the different placings of not in the sentence, which mean
negation of different parts of the sentence, are appropriately derivable from
different orderings of the tis not predicate in the ordering of predicates that
constructs the sentence. This is the same as we have seen for the different
placings of apverbs (also derived from predicates).

5.6. Moods
The above survey of increments has shown that at one cost or another, every

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

325

type of increment (except and, or) can be derived from a predicate on sentences. In addition, certain apparent increments have been shown in transformational analysis to be obtained by paraphrastic transformations from
other incremental forms. In particular, this is the case for the various grammatical 'moods'. All question forms, both the yes-no form (Are you going?) and
the wh- form (When are you going? What will you take? are paraphrastic
transformations of I ask you whether you are going or not. I ask you when you
are going (or: whether you are going at time A or .. , or you are going at time
Z). I ask you what you will take (or: whether you will take A or ... or Z). The
imperative, e.g. (Please) go!, is derived from I command(or: request) you that
you (please) go. The optative Would that he returned! is derivable from I
would that he returned, I wish that he would return. And so on. That is to say,
these forms are obtained not by an increment of an intonation (plus some
changes) to an existing sentence, but by paraphrastic transformation from
known types of predicate operators.
The sources reached in many of these derivations have the additional advantage of being less restricted, in the manner of § 2. For example, the question form does not appear under sentence-operators except those which
produce that form. We have (1) I ask you: Is she reading it? ~ (2) I ask you
whether she is reading it (or not), (2) being indeed the source of (1). But ~
He told them: Is she reading it? and ~ He is waiting with the book while: Is she
reading it? However, the source form of the question occurs freely under all
sentence-operators: 3 He told them (that) I ask you whether she is reading it
(or not), 3 He is waiting with the book while I ask you whether she is reading it
(or not). The paraphrastic transformation to the question form occurs in certain of the operator-environments in which the source form occurs (e.g.
under and: I'm reading it and is she reading it?) but not in all, as above.
5.7. And, Or

Two incremental operators have been left without any indication of how they
could be derived from predicates: and, or. One might think of replacing and
operating on SI' S2 by a predicate conjoins on SI, S2; and so for or. But this
may not fit as simply into the grammar as the previous predicate sources.
In any case, one can show that and is an operator only on sentences. It is
always possible to derive and in predicates from and or other operators on
sentence. And even and on nouns can be so derived. This has already been
seen, for example, in the reciprocal verbs (4.3); many other cases of Nl and
N2 can be derived from Nl with N2 or from the set consisting of Nt and N2 ~
the set contains Nl and the set contains N 2 • A particular problem here is that
of the collective verbs Veol/' e.g. gather, which are restricted to subjects or
objects consisting of Nand N, or Nand Nand ... and N (at least 3), or instead

326

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

to certain collective nouns Neoll such as set, crowd, group. Here one can say
that, in the source, Veoll selects only (in effect, is restricted to) Neoll as subject
or object. The cases with Nand N would be derived as follows:
Nand Nand N gathered at the corner.15
i-Neoll which consisted ofN and Nand N gathered at the corner.
i-wh- (Neoll gathered at the corner: Neoll consisted of Nand N
and N).
The second operand here can be built up as follows:
N I is a member of Neoll and N2 is a member of Neoll and N3 is a
member of N eoll ' ~ NI and N2 and N3 are members of
Neoll'
On this there operates is complete or is exhaustive, yielding:
NI and N2 and N 3's membership of Neoll is exhaustive.
~Nl and N2 and N3 exhaust (the membership of) N eoll '
-+Neoll consists of Nl and N2 and N 3.
We now ask whether and between sentences is not simply a morphophonemic
form of period between successive sentences in a discourse. Such an analysis
does not seem adequate, first because it leaves the parallel problem of or, and
secondly because and (and or) also operates on untensed (and period-less)
sentences under all operators. In particular, or is essential under ask, wonder
and similar operators, and and is essential in the derivation of the numbers,
reciprocal verb, collectives, etc., and in specifying the operand-domain (the
scope of operation) of certain zeroings (and of wh- plus pronouns). There
are other operations which depend not upon and but upon the successive
(and addressable) periods among sentences of a discourse: These are, above
all, pronouns and the more subtle methods ofreference l6 , and also discourse
structure.
6. RESULT

6.1. Summary of Reductions
We begin with the set of sentences S, as given in transformational linguistics, and with the sets of incremental transformations (or operators) and of
paraphrastic transformations T defined on it. On the set of increments,
the following grammatical reductions have been proposed in §§ 2-5:
For each individual incremental operator A, if it is restricted to a subdomain of values of the variables in its argument or in the operators upon it,
we seek a free variant for A which is not restricted in this way. The unrestricted variant is taken as source; the restrictions are on the T (§ 2).
For each incremental operator A which is restricted in operator or argu-

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

327

ment domain, but does not have an unrestricted free variant, we seek one or
more increments (one of which may be zero) each of which occurs with a
subdomain of operator or argument which is complementary to that of the
others and to that of A, such that the sum of the subdomains is the unrestricted domain of the variables in question. If we find increments which
are only partly complementary, we try to make them completely complementary by assuming a zero able element to occur in certain environments
of one of the increments. An unrestricted morphophonemic source sentence
(*S) is formed for the complementary variants (§ 3).
If a paraphrastic transformation T is restricted to a particular subdomain
A' of its operand A, we try to assume a zeroable operator Z (possibly a metalinguistic one) which A' can accept on selectional (co-occurrence) grounds,
such that T can operate on Z and thereby operate on those occurrences of A'
which are under Z. E.g., T may be a free variant of Z (§ 4). This is discussed
here because it affects the form of the source increment.
We choose a particular sentence-position in respect to arguments, such
that, for each incremental operator which does not occur in that position in
respect to its argument (when it forms a sentence with its argument) we seek a
free variant - if necessary, a metasentence one - that has this position; and
if none is available we construct a morphophonemic source (*S) which does.
F or English and many other languages, this sentence position is the 'predicate'
position, namely that of V, be N (P), be A (P), be P (§ 5).
6.2. An Unrestricted Subset of Sentences

Each of these steps can be carried out over all the transformations of the
language. The first three steps produce free or complementary (automatic)
variants which are unrestricted, and which can be taken as sources of the
restricted ones. The last step gives to all increments a single source sentenceposition. The recognizing or forming of these source-sentences is of special
interest because of the following construction:
First, we form the set S+ by adding to S all the morphophonemic
source-sentences *S introduced by the steps of §§ 2-5 or the conventional
methods of structural and transformational linguistics. Then S+ contains,
for example, the tenseless *He go, as well as He goes. Second, we form a set
I consisting of all the source-sentences (asterisked or not) established
in the above steps, plus all those other sentences of S+ (again, whether
asterisked morphophonemic sources or actual sentences) which contain only
increments, and are not paraphrastic transforms. These will be unrestricted
increments, since the restricted ones will have been treated in §§ 2-5. Then
I is a restrictionless subset of S+, and is obtained by removing from the
sentences of S+ all effects (traces) of T, leaving each residual sentence to

328

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

consist only of the arguments and incremental operators specified in 7.2.
We now consider the relation of I to S-I, its complement in S+. The
sentences in S-I are products of increments and paraphrastic transformations T, while those of I contain no T-traces. If for each sequence of
increments and primitive arguments which constitutes the non-paraphrastic
material of some sentence in S-I there exists in I a sentence composed of
precisely that sequence, then it follows that for each sentence A of S-I
there is some sentence A' of I such that A is a paraphrastic transform of A',
and is derivable from A' or from the same increment-sequence as in A', by
certain T.
To show this, it is sufficient that, for all pairs of an increment and a T, if
there exists a sentence
Si = incrementi on T j on Sk'

then there must exist a sentence differing only in the Trtrace 17
Sh = incrementi on Sk'

That is, there should be no case of a T enabling an increment to operate on
a sentence (or more precisely on an increment-sequence) on which it would
not operate otherwise. This demand seems to be satisfied in English and in
other languages, as has been sketched in §§ 2-5. In contrast, there are many
cases in which a T prevents an increment from operating on an incrementsequence on which it otherwise can operate. E.g. if
(I)

He is writing

is derived by zeroing from
(2)

He is in process of writing,

then we have nominalizing sentence-operators on (2), as in (2') His being in
the process of writing is (quite) frequent, but not on the resultant of zeroing,
i.e. not on (1): Hence (1') ~ His being writing is (quite) frequent. Also: The
question does not occur under sentence-operators, as in ~ They suspect is he
going (5.6), but the source of the question does: They suspect that I ask you
whether he is going or not, or even (though less certainly) They suspect that I
ask you: is he going or: They suspect that I ask you: Is he going? The increment They suspect does not operate on the zeroing of I ask you, or equivalently the zeroing of I ask you does not operate (is not addressable) under the
increment They suspect.
For every Si' Sh pair as above, the question arises whether the Tj component of Sl must be ordered in among the incremental components, or
whether we can formulate the T components in such a way that they would

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

329

operate after all the incremental components. In other words, can we always
obtain Sj by T j (possibly reformulated) operating on the corresponding 1sentence Sh?
Thus, in investigating the relation between 1 and S-I, we now consider
the placing of the T in respect to the increments. One arrangement would
have each T in a sentence operate as soon as its operand has been formed.
That is to say, if a T which is defined on arguments X, Y has operated in the
construction of a sentence, then it must have operated before any further increments on X, Y. In such an analysis, the operator representation of the sentence requires no special addressing in the argument of the T. Thus, the two
(ambiguous) analyses of
I dislike his speaking because she can't.
would be
(3)

dislike (I, Tz(because (speak (he), not (can speak (she»»»

in the sense of His speaking because she can't is disliked by me and
(3')

Tz(because (dislike (I, speak (he», not (can (speak (she»»)

in the sense of His speaking is disliked by me because she can't speak. In each
case the Tz zeroes the word which is repeated (in a position corresponding
to its antecedent) under the immediate operand of Tz' Of course, the increment I dislike could also have operated without the Tz' In both analyses
we would have
I dislike his speaking because she cannot speak.
which in the sense of (3) is:
(4)

dislike (I, because (speak (he), not (can (speak (she»»)

and in the sense of (3') is:
(4')

because (dislike (I, speak (he», not (can (speak (she»».

In (3) dislike has operated on Tz, whereas in (4) it did not. In some cases, an
increment does not operate on a particular T. Such an increment is found
only on the T-Iess operand, as in (1), (2) above:'
for (2'): be frequent (be in process (write (he»).
for (1'): ~ be frequent (Tz (be in process (write (he»».
An alternative arrangement to the above is that all T in a sentence operate
after all increments have operated. This is a more complex description, for it
requires the arguments of each T to be provided with addresses in the sen-

330

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

tence, indicating on what segments or operators in the sentence the given T
is operating. Thus, in this decomposition, (3) above would appear as:
TZ(becaus.) (dislike (I, because (speak (he), not (can (speak (she»)).
In both of these types of T-placing some addressing may in some cases be
needed to indicate what word in the argument is zeroed. In the second type,
however, the restrictions would be due not to an increment refusing to operate on a T (as for (I') above) but rather to the T refusing to operate on
(i.e. be addressable to) the operands of certain increments. Thus we would
have, for (I'):
~ TZ(in proc ••• ) (be frequent (be in process (write (he»)

6.3. A Sublanguagefor Objective Information

The result indicated above, that S-I contains only paraphrases of sentences
of I, gives a new importance to the traditional linguistic search for removing restrictions. Modern linguistic analysis, whether descriptive, structural
or transformational, has always sought to remove restrictions. Of course, the
restrictions could not really be removed, but only moved: For example, in
phonology, the great number of sounds that are heard in a language are
organized into just a few phonemes; but this is at a cost, for whereas there
was previously no such distinction as one between an element and its pronunciation (or its gross acoustic shape in the world of physical events), we
now have to say that each phoneme may have more than one pronunciation,
according to its environment. The total number of sounds remains naturally
the same, but the number of statements necessary to describe them all may be
greatly reduced, and the writing far simplified.
In the present case, the fact that I contains all the increment-combinations, which in interpretation means roughly all the objective information,
that can be carried in S+ gives a particular importance to shifting all subdomain restrictions out of I: it means that the subdomain restrictions are
not necessary for expressing the objective information carried by language.
That is to say, one can carry all the objective information of language in a
system containing no such restrictions. Moving the restrictions is therefore in
this case not merely a matter of structural compactness or elegance, but a
gain for the interpretation and for the utilization of language-information,
because the restrictions have here been moved out of a distinguished part of
S+, leaving that distinguished part as a far simpler system which is nevertheless capable of doing all the objective informational work.
This completes the restriction-removal activity of sentence (but not discourse) grammar, in so far as applies to the existing vocabulary of the language. (A step beyond this will be indicated in § 9.) This bringing to completion

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

331

creates an effect which the various partial restriction-removals could not
produce: Metalinguistically, it brings out the semantic interpretation of
syntax: one can now see that each syntactic element (variable, operator-type,
etc.) enters into combinations in a way that is directly interpretable by the
meanings they carry. Linguistically, 1 is a system in which (within the limitations of how information is represented by morphemes) syntactic form
and objective information correlate well: every two different pieces of such
information are expressed by different sentences; but it is not at all excluded
that, even when paraphrastic transformations are eliminated, the complex
semantic overlappings in the vocabulary would permit two different sentences to carry the same information.
In studying the relation of 1 to 5+. the major question that remains at
this point is to what extent the sentences in 1, which are the source-sentences from which the sentences of 5-1 are derived, are themselves sentences of the original set 5 (and hence free variants of the sentences of
5-1), and to what extent, and in what way, they are asterisked morphophonemic source-sentences, formed for 5+ but not extant in 5: From the
sentences in 1 which are not asterisked. those sentences of 5-1 whose
source they are derived by T. These T also derive some sentences of 5-1
from other ones. If the sentences in 5-1 for which asterisked sources have
been formed in 1 differ from these asterisked sources (i.e. are derivable
from them) by no more than these same T, it would mean that all sentences
of 5-1 (i.e. all the remaining sentences of the language) are derived from
all sources in 1 only by T. This would hold whether the source sentences
in 1 are real or asterisked. In English, all sentences in 1 are of the form
*S because they lack the required tensing (and in some cases also plural)
morphophonemics. Nevertheless, in the case of English and many other languages, such asterisked *S sources as have to be formed in 1 satisfy the
condition of differing from S only by established T.
When this condition is satisfied, then 5+ is only a slight extension of the
set of real sentences 5, for it involves no extension of the set T which derive
all sentences from others, except for adding new morphophonemic changes
to the list of morphophonemic T. In fact it is only a regularization of the
domain of T, i.e. of the T-relation among sentences. It is then worth calling
5+ an extended natural language, and 1 (for all its asterisked members)
a subset of that language. It may, however, happen in some languages that
some of the asterisked sources differ from the sentences in 5-1 (that are to
be derived from them) by T*, where T* are paraphrastic operations which
differ from T or which include T as only a proper part. Then 1, which contains these asterisked sources, can no longer be re~sonably viewed as a subset
of what we would consider a (slightly extended) natural language. Rather,

332

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

I would have to be considered a projection of S-I. This situation might
be the case in some languages for the fourth step above (§ 5), when we seek a
single positional relation that all increments have to the sentences onto which
they are added. If such a relation is not attainable with any morphophonemics
that would fit into the given language, it may still be attainable in principle,
as a purely syntactic rather than also morphemic relation. In that case, the
purely syntactic form could be simply the operator notation, which identifies
each increment as an operator on a particular argument.
We noW begin with S+ as an empirically given set of sentences with the
addition of asterisked source-sentences. Transformational theory shows that
it contains a base set K of elementary sentences (,sentences of the kernel')
from which all other sentences are derived, and two sets of transformations,
the incremental and the paraphrastic, by which the sentences of S+ are
derived from other members of S+. The empirical set S+ is closed under
these transformations, and it is as such that we call S+ a language. S+ is
also closed under T above, taking I as the base set. When I is a subset of
S+, it is a sublanguage of the language S+. This is so because the operators in I are the increments, which derive members of I from other
members of I and ultimately from the base set of elementary sentences
(K or *K, i.e. morphophenemic sources of K), which is contained in I.
I is closed under the incremental operators.
Although both I and its complement S-I are subsets of S+, the
structures (grammars) of each of these are not subgrammars of that of S+.
The subsets have been separated on the basis of grammatical properties: presence or absence of T, and hence of all the environmental ('distributional')
and string properties (§ 8) that T bring in. Therefore the grammars of I
and of S-I each contain relations which are lacking in the grammar of
S+ (or in the grammar of the set of real sentences S). As will be seen
below, they are each simpler and more transparent systems than is the
grammar of the whole language, and have interpretations which do not
naturally arise from the grammar of the whole language.

7. THE PREDICATE SYSTEM
7.0. The Metalanguage

In considering the structure of I, we note first that the removal of restrictions and the environment-filling method of § 4 eliminate most of the metagrammar needed for stating the grammar of I. Each increment can be
provided with an indication (a subscript) of its argument variables, and every
sequence consisting of increments operating on variables that match their
arguments is well formed, i.e. is in I.

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

333

7.1. The Base

When the increments are viewed, like the T, as transformations from one
subset of sentences (those satisfying the argument requirements) to another
(those containing the increment as their latest - i.e. not operated on - operator), then we have to take the elementary ('kernel') sentences or their morphophonemic sources as a base set K or *K within I; from K or *K, the
sentences of I are generated by the increments. However, we have seen
that all increments except and, or form their resultant sentences by serving as
the verbal segment in respect to their argument. It therefore becomes convenient to look upon the elementary sentences as being themselves the resultants of an operator (their verbal segment) acting upon their primitive arguments (their subject and object nouns). Then the operators of I are not
only the increments but also the verbal segments of the elementary sentences.
The primitive operands are the subjects and objects of the elementary sentences. The operators are now no longer transformations from sentences to
sentences, but operations which produce a sentence when carried out on a
sentence or non-sentence operand. Indeed, if we can show that the increments
affect only the most recently operating (i.e. not already operated on) verbal
segment of their operand, we can define the argument of each increment to
be certain operators rather than a whole sentence. This analysis presents,
of course, a purely syntactic relation; the physical contents - what morphemes in what positions - will be considered in 7.4, 5.
7.2. The Operators

For English the primitive arguments are primarily the concrete N, and the
main operator sets are:
Vn: e.g. exist, be tall, be a mammal, be up.
Vnn: e.g. eat, be father of, be near (to).
V nnn: e.g. be between ... and; possibly give ... to.
Vv : e.g. be afact, continue. Thus His smoking continues would be: continue
(smoke (he}).
Vnv: e.g. think, In almost all arguments which contain both v and n, the n
indicates the subset of nouns which denote living beings: it is only these that
can be related to the v by the given operator. Thus I think he drinks tea would
be: think (I, drink (he, tea)}.
Vnnv: e.g. tell.
Vyy : e.g. be because of, correlate with.
Vnvv: e.g. relate ... to.
Cvv : and, or.
Special subtypes of V with v-arguments carry particular classificatory

334

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

morphemes, as in request-for-afterwards (4.2), an-undergoing-for-the-object
(4.4). We may also wish to recognize a V whose argument is a constant,
e.g. rain, late (Whence morphophonemically It's raining, It's late).
Each operator operates on its arguments to produce a sentence. Those
whose arguments include operators (V) are increments. The others form
elementary sentences.
The products (sequences) of operators are associative, even though the
conjunctional transforms of many Vvv are not. The Cvv and certain of the
Vvv are interpretation ally commutative in the sense that while SI and S2 is a
different sentence than S2 and S1 it carries the same objective information.
It is not certain that Cvv must be taken as binary rather than n-ary (for n> 1)
in argument. In constructing a sentence, the operators are apparently
linearly ordered. Each can then occur whenever its arguments are present
(and not already operated on). The ordering and repeatability possibilities
of an operator are determined by its arguments.
To these must be added one operation quite different from these operators.
In this operation we pair each occurrence (in a discourse) of an element or sequence of elements A with an address which indicates the position of A in the
discourse or in any stated segment of the discourse (e.g. sentence or structurally identified section of a sentence). In the actual form of the sentence and
discourse or a sequence of phonemes, morphemes, words, etc., the address of
A states that A is the nth occurrence, in a given segment of the discourse, of a
member of the class of A. In the operator form, if an operator B contains
within its argument the address of A, then the address states what position A
occupies in the operand of B. This addressing is implicit in the linear ordering
of phonemes and words which comprise a discourse, and in the ordering of
operators and their arguments, as morphemes, by which we represent the
actual sentences and discourses. This addressing is necessary for the metadiscourse operators which are included within the grammar of the language,
and for certain paraphrastic T (e.g. zeroing of repeated words in particular
relative positions). It is also needed if we try to place all T after all increments
(end of 6.2).
Finally: what is produced by the operator is a sentential string, but not
quite a sentence because it lacks the sentence-intonation (period) and its
attendant morphophonemics (primarily tensing). The placing of the period
takes a sentential string out of 1 for then it can no longer be operated on
by the operators of I, or by the T-operators of S-I. Similarly for sentential strings produced in S-I.
7.3. The Values

The arguments and operators in formulas are class-marks, i.e. variables

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

335

over certain domains. Each value Ai of an operator A imposes a partial
ordering of acceptability (or subject-matter classification) on the values of its
argument B; but A apparently leaves unaltered the partial orderings in which
B otherwise participates. That is, the partial ordering of acceptability which
B had imposed upon the arguments of B, and any partial ordering of acceptability which B has in respect to any other operator on B (if B can be an
argument of more than one operator - see immediately below), are invariant
under A's operating on B.
In what variable (or variables) of its operand does each value of an operator impose a partial ordering of acceptability on the values of the variable?
This variable in the operand would be the effective argument of the operator.
The question is important for the fundamental problem of operatorsyntax, namely: what is the relevant argument of each operator? And the
main, and still partly open, question in whether the increments are linearly or
partially ordered is a matter of how increments relate to each other in respect
to the arguments on which they impose an acceptability-ordering.
7.4. Morphemic Shape

For the most part, each operator introduces into the sentence one morpheme,
and of only the predicate morpheme classes: V, be A (P), be N (P ), be P; aside
from and, or. The be is clearly morphophonemic and not an independent
morpheme. The operator N are e.g., classifiers (mammal,fact) and relations
(father), and are not the same morphemes as in the concrete N class. There
are, however, many cases in which the demands of simple and consistent
syntactic relations make us assume a morphologically complex form as the
syntactic source, as when we take, say, His acting is an occupation, or the
like, as source (via argument-skipping) for He is an actor. Where there is a
conflict between syntactic regularity and morphological regularity, we see
that the operator system is a syntactic one.
The operator system is morphologically convenient in another way too.
To a large extent, each morpheme is a value of only one operator: thus the
-ing of be-ing (He is running), as also the -ing of verb-operators (He continued
running), are derived from the -ing of sentence nominalization (His running
continued.).
7.5. String Shape

Although every sentence and discourse is a sequence of morphemes, the only
way in which grammatical descriptions have succeeded in characterizing
which sequences are those that constitute sentences has been by finding
among the morphemes of the sentence certain relations which are not immediately apparent from their positions. In transformational theory, and espe-

336

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

cially in the further reduction of §§ 2-5, this relation is that of operator to
argument. A sentence can be fully represented by a linear or partial ordering of operators, each operating on a prior one, with the innermost operating on primitive arguments. The argument of each operator can be written
in parentheses. The sentences of a natural language, however, do not use
parentheses and do not directly indicate the operator-argument relation. The
possibility of representing in a string of words the same thing that the operator notation represents, is achieved in language by means of an apparatus
which can best be described in two stages: In I it is done by means of a
classification of morphemes in respect to their known arguments, and by
means of a relative positioning of operator and arguments (see below); these
together give the morphemes of I-sentences a 'string' relation to each other:
what is subject, predicate, object, etc. In S-I it is achieved as follows: when
T produces B out of A, it makes particular changes in the relative positions of
the morphemes of A, and may give them the appearance of different operator-argument relations. Thus these morphemes appear in changed string
relations to each other in B; the relative positioning is important because on
it are defined certain prominent morphophonemics such as the location of
tensing or the agreement of verb with subject in respect to plural. In many of
these changes, the participating morphemes receive particular constants
(usually affixes) marking the change. We can say that the string relation of
I are produced by the operators of I, and the string changes (to new string
relations) in S-I are produced by T.
Given the transformational representation of a sentence, i.e. the operator
relations among the morphemes in it, and the T if any, we can determine the
positions and string-relation constants of the morphemes, i.e. we can determine the actual word-sequence that is the sentence. And conversely: Given
the word sequence and a grammatical lexicon, i.e. a list of which morphemes
belong to which operator (or argument) classification, we can determine (in
some cases, ambiguously) the string relations in this sequence and thence the
operator relations and the T.
Here we consider the string shape of the I operators in English; the
string changes in S-I are noted in 8.4. A major advantage in having
found (§ 5) a single positional relation in respect to the argument, which
the sources of almost all increments would have, is that this gives a single
string structure to all source sentences, i.e. to I. It shows that a single
positional (syntactic) relation suffices for all the operators of I. As among
these, and and or differ from all the other operators (the predicates) only
in morphophonemic respects, below. Such string complexity as there is in
I is due to the nested superposing of the syntactic relations of those elements which are in the given sentence both operators and arguments. In I,

337

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

the ordered morphemes of an operator A concatenate with its sequence of
arguments B, in such a way that the operator morphemes occupy evennumbered positions, and the ordered arguments the odd-numbered positions,
in the resultant sequence:
~.,-...~

~,.-..,.,

A1A1".A,,(BloB1,··., B"Bn+1)=B1 Al B1 A1"·B,, A" Bn+1·
The interpretation, both in the operator notation and in the word-concatenation, is that the BI is the subject of Al (as predicate) and B1 the direct
object, and the remaining B what may be called indirect objects. Under a
predicate operator (but not and, or), when one of the arguments Bp is itself
a predicate, there is attached to Bp a constant which depends upon the first
morpheme of the operator. This constant indicates that the predicate is also
an argument; the main constant is -ing or other nominalizing affix (zero under
the operator make, etc.). If an argument B itself has arguments C, these stay
concatenated to B as a single entity in respect to A; and if B receives a
nominalizing constant then C receives an adjectivizing constant, primarily:
's (mostly for first operand under B), by (only for first operand under B),
of (rarely on the first operand if it occurs on the second operand under B).
The choice of constants is free, or depends on C. Thus when B becomes an
operand of A, then C receives constants which mark the relation it had to B
before B had become an operand. The constants (and positions) indicate the
operator-argument relations that had existed in the sentence before A
operated on it.
The string structures in I are therefore such as the following:
exist (gas) = *gas exist -+ Gas exists.
between and (N, L, M) = *N between Land
M -+ N is between Land M.
V0(N, VI, V1): relate to (I, grow, increase) = I relate". growth
to ... increase.

YeN):
YeN, N):

Here the arguments of the two operand-verbs V 1, V1, were not shown, in
order to bring out the positional relation of the new operator V0 to its immediate arguments. If we take the resultant ofthe above with
V1 (N): grow (tree) = *Tree grow,
Vz(N): increase (rain) = *Rain increase,
we obtain
relate to (I, grow (tree), increase (rain» =
I relate the tree's growth to the rain's increase.
The -th and's are parts neither of the operator nor of the argument. They
are constants indicating the superposition of syntactic statuses: -th nomina
zation ofVl under Vo; 's adjectivization of subjects when their verb becomes

338

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMA TIONAL LINGUISTICS

an argument. Similarly, the -s and is above are neither in the operator nor
in the argument, but are morphophonemic effects. See also 8.5 (l), (2).
In the case of all operators but and, or the words entering the second position in the resultant string are of the predicate morpheme-classes (7.4) and
can undergo certain T (argument-skipping, certain zeroings, placing of the
morphophonemic tense). In the case of and, or the morphological class is
different and the T which can operate on them are fewer and different (different zeroings and permutations).
The fact that there is one position, relative to all arguments, which is taken
by all operators, and the further fact that the operators belong to morphologically recognizable classes of known arguments, makes the word strings
which are sentences of I readily computable. That is to say, it makes their
operator-argument (i.e. syntactic) relations recognizable to the hearer word
by word, without waiting for parenthesis-closings. (It will be seen in § 8 that
the T bring considerable complexity, and even degeneracies, into the recognizability of the operator-argument relations of the words, but without destroying computability.) To the extent that different morphemes occur as
values of the different variables, the operator-argument relations are more
immediately recognizable. To the extent that certain morphemes (or merely
phoneme-sequences) occur as values of more than one class-variable (e.g. of
both Vnn and Vnv) the operator-argument relations are less transparent in
I, and in S-I ambiguities may result.
7.6. Relation to Linguistic Analysis

In the I sublanguage more can be said than had been thought sayable
in S, because regular sources are discovered whose existence had been put
into shadow by the more compact but more restricted variants. Such restrictions as exist in I are more like the semantically reasonable and changeable
restrictions of selection (co-occurrence) than like the grammatical restrictions
of unbreakable 'rules'.
The meanings of words and of constructions are seen more sharply than in
the language as a whole. For example, when we see the source of the comparative, which is e.g. for He is richer than she:
n is more than m.
His riches amount to n.
Her riches amount to m,
we see that indeed the comparative does not include He is rich as an immediate syntactic source (but only N is the amount of his riches), just as it does
not include the meaning of that sentence in its direct meaning18•
The approach in descriptive linguistics had been to sweep everything

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

339

under the carpet, i.e. to obtain regular grammar at the cost of irregular
source. Thus the subjunctive could be presented as what occurs after verbs
that require the subjunctive; and then the non-subjunctive form I request his
going is obtained from the subjunctive by a transformation. In the present
work, however, we want the source to be as regular as possible, since we
want its structure to contain no complexity other than what is required by
its informational burden. The only cost that we can admit is in the morphophonemic complexity of the source; for this is unrelated to the objective information, though it complicates the subjective task of coding and decoding.
Thus in the case of the subjunctive we would first note that this can be viewed
in English as a morphophonemic change from a tenseless (and non-subjunctive) form; then in considering the verbs which require or permit this morphophonemic change, we would try to characterize them not by a list but by
the fact that they selectionally always have subsequently or the like in their
environment (or, indeed, as part of them) in such a way that (as in § 4) the
subjunctive form would be a free variant replacement or a free or required
accompanying variant of that accompanying word.
As the operators become unrestricted, and as subset listings are replaced
by the presence of classifier morphemes in the environment, we begin to
have elements whose properties are no longer inherent but due only to their
positional relations and whose combinations (Le. positional relations) are
sufficiently regular and simple to permit of something approaching a mathematical characterization. It also becomes possible to find relations of relations, such as elements whose positional relations are the inverse of each
other's: e.g. before and after are inverses of each other when they are taken
as Vyy (or as Vnn on two time-nouns) but not when they are taken as conjunctions.
8. THE MORPHOPHONEMIC SYSTEM
8.0. Introduction

The paraphrastic transformations T, which operate on the sentences of
I and of S-J to produce the sentences of S-J, can be considered an
extension of morphophonemics. Morphophonemics is the change of the
phonemic shape of a morpheme; if automatic, the change appears when the
morpheme occurs in the environment of particular other morphemes. The T
include such changes (from the source morphemic shape, 7.4); but they also
include changes in the positional relations of the morphemes (from those
of 7.5). As in morphophonemics, the original syntactic relations of the
source sentence are not lost, although secondary syntactic relations are superposed (8.5); and there are various other changes: e.g. at what point of the
sentence the hearer is apprised of particular syntactic elements (8.2). All

340

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

this applies also to morphophonemics, though in a much simpler way. Hence
all T can be considered to be morphophonemic, or perhaps to constitute a
corresponding relation of syntaxomorphemics: the change of the morphemic
(and ultimately phonemic) shape of a syntactic element or sequence.
The change occurs freely in all or in certain syntactic (i.e., now, operator)
environments, or requiredly (automatically) in certain syntactic environments.
The difference between the increment system and the paraphrastic T
system is roughly that between the directly useable activities of life and the
institutional apparatus which channelizes these activities. Like social institutions, the T system structures, facilitates, slants, and petrifies the activitiesfor-use of the I system, and is inflexible, conventional, and in part historically accidental; and in some cases it stands in the way offurther development
of the use-activities, i.e. of the directly meaningful expressions of I. Indeed,
the relations between I and S-I can be studied as a very special case of
the relations between activities-for-use and their institutionalization.
S.2. The Interpretation ofT

In structural linguistics, morphophonemic changes do not change the meaning of a morpheme, since the meaning of morphemes does not depend on its
phonemes, which is all that morphophonemics changes. But there can result
a change as to where in the sentence the hearer is apprised of the presence
of a particular morpheme. Thus in a question beginning Will ... the hearer
knows nothing of the subject until he hears it, but in a question beginning
Am ... the hearer knows beforehand that the subject is I.
The morphemic and string changes of the type of 8.1 produce various (or
no) modifications of the information in their operand sentences, but always
without altering the objective information carried by their base sentences in
I. Pronouning and zeroing neither destroy nor add information; they are
carried out in such a way that the dropped morphemes (or their equivalents)
can be reconstructed from the residue. However, they can give an indication,
earlier than in the source, of the identity of individual reference of certain
words: I saw a boy and spoke with him +- I saw a boy and spoke with a boy and
the two boys were the same. And they can lead to degeneracies (ambiguities):
I met John, and Mary too. +- I met John and I met Mary too, or +- I met
John, and Mary too met John. In many cases they do little more than abbreviate the sentence: He explained this and left +- He explained this and he left.
Many zeroings, and certain other T, occur when a particular argument is
the expected one for the given operator (or vice versa) - expected in the culture
as a whole, or in a particular subject matter, or in a particular conversation,
etc. Thus from the source operator be in A manner, the manner is zeroable if

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

341

the particular A is one which is more expectably an adjective of manner than
some other adjective, e.g. of occurrence (in 2.3). Hence it is zeroable in He
spoke in a hesitant manner ~ He spoke hesitantly, but not in He arrived in an
unexpected manner -H- He arrived unexpectedly. This and some other changes,
such as the zeroing of to arrive under expect, and the conditions for but,
make expectability a property in S-I, though not in 1.
In transformations which are restricted to a subset of the domain, the
resultant receives a more restricted meaning, expressing the effect of the increment upon this more limited environment. Thus, whereas the source be
before simply means 'prior', the time-conjunction before has rather the
meaning of 'prior within the same sUbjective time-segmentation', since it
only relates two past events to each other, or two future events.
In some T, especially such as bring a word out to the beginning of a sentence, there is an attention-directing effect upon the meaning of a sentence:
e.g. This in particular I like ~ I like this in particular, and the passive, etc. In
some T, this device is less a matter of directing attention to a particular word
in the sentence as of directing to that word the argument status in some
further operator: e.g. I have a book which you want is most directly derivable
from wh- on the pair I have a book. a book you want, which is derivable from
something like n-2, I have a book and, n-l, you want a book and, n, book
ofn-l is same individual as book ofn-2. (The n are addresses in the discourse.)
If we consider carefully the meaning effect of all T, we see that they do not
alter the objective report that is carried in their operand, and ultimately in
the {I} sentence to which they relate; this is hardly surprising since by definition they do not alter the acceptability-ordering of the word n-tuples.
However, while some of the T are indeed simple paraphrases with no appreciable change in nuance, others add discernible nuances which can perhaps
be best summarized as subjective, for the hearer or for the speaker. Some of
these simply affect when in the course of hearing the sentence the hearer is
apprised of a given content in the sentence. Some affect what the hearer
learns from a sentence by bringing in local ambiguity (which is resolved later
on in the sentence) or unresolved ambiguity. Some T involve the criterion of
what is considered an expectable operator or arguments at a given point in
the sentence construction. Others give special syntactic status to the subjective tense, i.e. the relation between when the sentence is said and when what it
says occurs. Others call attention to a particular segment of the sentence.
There are various kinds of such effects which are due to the T, and the matter
requires investigation. It is in any case clear that we can distinguish, on syntactic grounds, three interpretationally-different properties: objective report,
subjective discrimination, and pure paraphrase (including paraphrase for

342

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMA TIONAL LINGUISTICS

convenience of discourse, i.e. of relation to neighboring sentences). Such a
distinction in the interpretation of language might not have been thought
of without the evidence from transformations. But this fact need not surprise
us, since the history of structural linguistics has shown that precise grammatical analysis throws light on the meanings borne in language. And indeed
a test of a syntactic method is whether it makes predictable the meanings
of sentences, or the modifiability of their meanings - in short, whether it
contributes to the elimination of meaning as an independent primitive of
linguistics.
8.3. Creation of Subsets

The effect of the T upon the sentences of I yields certain new features in the
grammar of the whole language. One of these is the creation of grammatical
subsets of the major word or morpheme classes. In I there are virtually
no restrictions in the domain of operations, and virtually no subclasses. Such
subclasses as there are, are a matter of changeable selection rather than fixed
grammatical subclasses: e.g. the living-being or human-like subjects of many
increments whose arguments contain both N and V (know, etc.). The nonexistence of closed subclasses remains unchanged for those T which do not
apply to a restricted subdomain. However, those T which are restricted are
defined in respect to a particular subdomain. The defining institutionalizes
the subdomain and therefore freezes it, creating an unchanging grammatical
fact. This holds even for the T-restrictions which are based on I-selections.
Thus in I certain adjectival increments more naturally select occurrence
than manner (2.3); but in T, the zeroing of in manner (as against zeroing in
occurrence) fixes certain Aly as being adverbs of manner: hesitantly, but not
unexpectedly.
In some cases, the net effect of several morphophonemic T is to create a
subset of operators which are distinct in terms of the overt grammar: e.g.
the auxiliaries can, may, etc.
8.5. String Properties under T

In all this we see that in certain cases a T creates in its resultant a relation
among the concatenated words (or word sub-sequences) of a sentence that
differs from anything present in I. In addition to the subject, predicate,
and objects of 7.5, we have now adjuncts, which can be attached to one of
these or to the string as a whole. These adjuncts are formed by various T
out of the latest operator in a sentence, or out of a (permuted) Vvv plus its
second operand, or out of (permuted) and, or plus its second operand (after zeroing). The result of this adjunct-making is to leave the first operand
sentence (under a one-sentence or two-sentence operator) as a center string

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

343

with the structure of 7.5, while the operator (together with its second operand, if it has one) becomes an adjunct of the center or of some part of the
center. Many of these adjunct forms are marked by certain constants, in
addition to being usually permuted next to their host. In their constants, and
in their positions next to their host, they bear some resemblance to the
operand of an operand in 7.5. There is also some interpretational similarity:
In the string form of A(B(C)) in 7.5., the relation of A to B is unaffected by
the presence or nature of C (except perhaps for certain problematic cases).
And in the case of adjuncts, the string relations among the non-adjunct
entities are unaffected (except for certain problematic cases) by whether any
of them are hosts to adjuncts, and of what kind.
Many T also bring in certain innovations in the relations among the string
analyses of sentences. One such is the ambiguity exemplified in I met John,
and Mary too (8.2). Different zeroings and permutations, operating on different sentences, may degenerately produce identical strings of words, although
in each case the string of words has string relations (and grammatical meanings) appropriate to the particular operator sequence and T which produced
it.
Another such innovation is the fact that the resultants of many T exhibit
two or more simultaneous syntactic relations in the meaning of the sentence.
This is so because the string relations of the sentence on which the T operated
have not been effaced in the resultant. The constant of the T are indicators of
a change, rather than simply markers of the string relations in the resultant;
hence they indicate the string relations in the operand sentence as well as
those in the resultant.
Constants which indicate change have already been seen in the operands of
an operand (7.5): given V1(Nl> N 2 )=N1V1N 2 , we find that when VI becomes an operand as in VO(V 1) we obtain VO(Vl(Nl> N 2 »=N1's V1ing of
N 2 VO. Thus:
(1)

(2)

Students composed jazz.
Students' composing of jazz continued.

where Students' composing of jazz is positionally the subject of continued,
but within it the constants (and positions) show that students is the subject of
compose, and jazz its object. In this case, and throughout the sentences of
I, no two words show two different string relations to each other.
In the resultants of many T, however, the constants and the meaning of
the sentence exhibit both the new and the former string relations among the
same words (since no new words except for constants are brought in by T).
Thus in the passive of (1),
(3)

Jazz is composed by students,

344

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

jazz is the subject of is composed (by position and by the morphophonemics
of the plural subject-verb agreement that is associated with the string form of
7.5); but the constants be-en on the verb indicate that this string relation is a
mutation from the verb-object relation in the sentence on which the passive
had operated. And indeed, at the same time that it is subject of be composed,
jazz has the selectional properties and the meaning of an object of compose. Similarly the by shows that students, which is in the adjunct of be composed, is the subject of compose. Further, in the argument-skipping transform
of (2),
(4)

Students continued composingjazz,

students has subject relation to continue; but the -ing on the following verb
compose (together with the V v membership of continue) indicates that students
had the subject relation to compose in the sentence from which (3) was derived.
If we take the passive of (4) we obtain
(5)

The composing of jazz was continued by students,

where the composing ofjazz is the subject, and by students the adjunct, of be
continued; but as in (3) the constants be-en, by show that composing jazz
(or the composing of jazz) is the object, and students the subject, of continue;
and as in (4) the -ing shows that students is the subject of compose in the
sentence form prior to the action of the argument-skipping T. And if we
take the passive under the increment of (2) we obtain
(6)

Jazz' being composed by students continued,

where jazz is marked both as the subject of the operand be composed and
as the object of compose. And the argument-skipping transform of (6) is
(7)

Jazz continued being composed by students,

where jazz is the subject and be composed the object of continue; but as in
(4) be composed is also the prior subject of continue, in which case jazz is
the subject and by students the adjunct of the operand be composed (under
continue), where the be-en shows that jazz is the object and students the subject of compose.
The comments above list only a few of the string-relations among the
words in thes~ transforms, but they suffice to show that many different (but
not conflicting) string relations appear in the various transforms. The string
relations in the I sentence from which the transforms are derived is always
indicated, as well as all the string relations in each transform along the line of
derivation from 1. If we compare (7) above with (5), we find that the same

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

345

two T produced them, but in different order of application. The simultaneous
systems of string relations in (7) and (5) are however quite different, except
that both contain the string relations of their common J source. It is reasonable to say that the meanings of all these string relations are present in the
sentence (e.g. jazz in (7) being the subject of both continue and be composed
and the object of compose), but they do not seem to be ordered as meanings,
although to arrive at them requires an ordered undoing of the transformations
that had produced the final resultant sentence.
If we go from the ordered operator notation (i.e. of transformations) to
the natural string of words, the various constants and positionings are the
trace, in the word-string, of each ordered transformation upon its operand
sentence; they are changes in the sense that each transformation makes a
change upon its operand. If we go from the actual word sequence to its
transformational representation, then the constants and the positions have to
be taken not as objects in a static description of the sentence, but as the result of ordered changes: certain ones of them have to be reorganized as the
latest change (due to the latest transformation); when they are undone we
arrive at the operand sentence on which that change had been made, and then
have to recognize what is now the latest change, which had produced that
(operand) sentence in turn; and so on to the base.
It must be stressed that there are certain properties common to almost all
string changes, such that they preserve the general properties of the string
structure of J, or change them in only a few generally stateable ways.
Hence the whole language has an almost coherent string structure which
applies to all sentences (though in part vacuously to the sentences of J).
Nevertheless even here there are some exceptions to coherence, as in the
string structure of the moods (5.6).

8.6. Invariants
From the foregoing survey of the T, and of how they change the string structure of a sentence, we can see what it is that is preserved under T: It is the
operator order of the J source, or equivalently the I-string relations (7.5)
among words of the sentence. This gives the objective grammatical meaning
of the syntactic relation among the words, and is reachable from any T
resultant by a computation (which may contain ambiguous degeneracies).
The T add no new morphemes other than constants marking string-change,
and the only added meanings that these string changes bring in are subjective
without affecting the objective grammatical meaning carried over from the
J source.
In addition, the T preserve, by definition, the independent variables and
the acceptability-ordering of the sentences (or, equivalently, the selection-

346

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

ordering for the words in the sentences), and so the meanings of the sentences.
The I-operator ordering and objective meaning of a sentence are therefore invariants of sentences under T.
8.7. Structure of S-I

Just as we can state the sub-language grammar of I (7.2), so we can state
one for S-I. In S+ we take I as base, and T as the operators. Each T is
defined on particular transformations (increments or T) as arguments. Each
resultant sentence can be operated on by a partially ordered subset of T, or
equivalently by a string relation of its words which includes a particular
change from the string relation of the same words in the operand sentence.
The set of T can be organized in more than one convenient way since there
are only a few different types of T (partly indicated in 8.1) and there are
various similarities among the types. What is important in the kind of analysis proposed here, is that all T be recognized, and distinguished from the
increments. How the T are formulated, and whether a given T is to be decomposed into two or more successive elementary T, is not essential to decomposing the grammar of the language into the two systems. I and S-/- As
long as there was no evidence concerning what was the core of language, the
main goal of structural linguistics was to eliminate restrictions and increase
regularity in the relative occurrence (the combinations) oflanguage elements.
There was no other criterion for finding what was linguistically essential, out
of languages which obviously contained many inessential restrictions and
irregularities. For this reason, every reduction of the data to more regular
and basic elements had to be considered, even if it seemed to be based on
chance similarities in the data. However, given a base whose reality is supported
by absence of restriction, simplicity of structure and reasonableness of
interpretation, we are no longer in the position of simply extracting every
irregularity possible toward a residue that is defined only by its irreducibility. We now are given, for analysis, both an initial language and a final base
to which to reduce it. The bases - the primitive arguments N, or the elementary sentences K, or the paraphraseless sublanguage I - are indeed irreducible, but they are so in respect to explicit operations. In organizing the data as
a set constructed from a base (or reducible to it) by certain operators, we no
longer go merely by what eliminates an irregularity, but rather by what is the
best way of arranging operations that will reach from one structure to the
other. Differences of opinion as to what are the base operations (e.g. whether
the numbers should be derived from a count on occurrences of and), or inefficiencies in their action, are no longer crucial; one can leave room for
historical chance, for unused productivity, etc.

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

347

8.8. Derivation

In S+ we speak of deriving the sentences of I from its elementary sentences
K or *K, because each derivation adds an increment while preserving the
properties (operator order, string relations though in modified form, selection and meaning) of the operand sentence. We speak of deriving the sentences of S-I from those of I because (a) in those T-derivations which
apply to only a subdomain of their operand sentences (in I or in S-I)
the sense of the derivation can only be from the form which applies over a
larger domain to that which holds for a smaller domain (even if the former is
morphemically complex or uncomfortable); and (b) the other T-derivations,
where there is no reduction of domain, are of the same kind as (a).
The course of derivation also has good interpretation, in that the interword
grammatical relations which are passed through in the various stages of a
derivation are preserved in the simultaneous string-relations of the resultant
sentence (8.4), and in that the traces of intermediate derivational stages are
left in the lexical shift of words. Thus the meaning of something like 'bounded event' which adheres to talk in His talks are inspirational comes from the
predicate in His talking was in a piece (or: was an event) which is the source of
He had a talk, He gave a talk (5.4), which is a stage in the derivation. As far
as we can see, no relation and no meaning is present in a sentence except
those that are due to the primitive arguments, the ordered I-operators and
the T which appear in its derivation.
The existence of one apparent derivation for a sentence does not always
mean that there is no other derivation for the same sentence, which may
avoid some difficulties present in the first. Thus the reciprocal verbs could be
derived from a zeroing of each other determined by an environing V roc' but
more satisfactorily (from the point of view of metatheory) from a zeroing of
and this is implicit as in 4.3.
The sources for these derivations are set up here only in a structural sense.
However, some of them reflect the course of history by reconstructing a form
which had diverged into separate forms. Other sources, quite the contrary,
reflect the detailed limitations upon the combinability of words: There are
some words which have no linguistic utilization (combinability) beyond certain operator or operand environments, and it is this limitation that makes
them useable as particular sources or as derivable from particular sources.
9. BEYOND THE PRESENT ANALYSIS

The distinguishing of the I and S-I systems of language requires much
further work. Aside from questions of individual transformations and

348

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

derivations, there is the general problem of the detailed structure of each of
these systems: Do they depend on (or affect) only their immediate argument or
also the argument of their argument, and if so how far down? What operations are linearly ordered and what partially ordered? What types of domain
restriction appear in T, and what kind of subjective information do the T
carry? The distinction between objective and subjective information, which
arises out of the I-S-I-distinction, would also bear consideration. Within
I, where more is sayable than might at first have been thought for language,
the question arises what remains unsayable due to its structural limitation.
There is also the possibility of utilizing and even modifying the structural
characteristics of I. The removal of transformational paraphrase leaves I
as an information-processing system of a particular kind - and of a widespread kind, since this is human language. Sharper versions of an information
processing structure may be found, if an I system is constructed for the
sublanguages of particular sciences, where much dictionary paraphrase (which
is due to semantic overlapping in the vocabulary) can be isolated and eliminated, so that the correlation of structure and report becomes sharper, and
the particular relations of the science would be brought out sharply.
The structure of I applies to the morphemes that exist in language, and
to the particular meaning-ranges which they have, i.e. to the way information is represented by morphemes. The fact that part of its structure is achieved
by utilizing the limitations upon use of morphemes (8.7) suggests that if
we could find further limitations upon morpheme use we might obtain a still
more compact I. Such further limitations undoubtedly exist in language,
but they are limitations not upon morphemes but upon (synonymous) morpheme sets. This happens because in many cases we can find morphemes A,
B such that B is a free variant (and synonym) of A over only certain but not
all of the operator or operand environments of A: that is, a word may have
synonyms in all its occurrences i.e. in all its environments, but not always
the same synonym. Such free variation will have been missed in the methods
of §§ 2-5, which, for each morpheme, dealt with the whole set of its
occurrences, i.e. with the whole set of its environments in all its occurrences.
In establishing useful primitives of morphology, morphemes were freed
from the need to be phonemically simple. In the methods of the present
paper, useful primitives of syntax are sought by freeing them from the need
to be morphemically simple. That is, we did not take each morpheme and
classify it with those having similar combinability. Instead we sought morphemes and sequences of morphemes that had free or complementary variation to each other and called them all a single syntactic element. Now we can
consider the further possibility of freeing the syntactic primitive from vocabulary simplicity, i.e. from having to represent morphemes each in the full

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

349

range of its occurrence. We can consider how a given morpheme may be a
member of one syntactic element in some of its occurrences, and of another
element in others. Of course, methods have to be developed to decide how to
partition the range of occurrences of a morpheme without being arbitrary or
trivial. The partition would have to be similar for a whole class of morphemes, and each morpheme would have corresponding different synonyms
in each subset of its range. But it is not clear that effective tests can be made
for this.
If a useable method could be developed for discovering all of these sectional
free variations (synonym sets), we would eliminate all sectional synonymity
(and homonymity, which does not hold between synonym sets). Such a
further reduction may be practicable for particular small word classes (e.g.
the Vvv and the subordinate conjunctions which are transforms of them), or
within sublanguages of science.
The method envisioned here may be applicable in a special situation. In
general, we cannot expect to be able to go beyond morphemes toward freer
syntactic primitives. The reason is that morphemes have too much selectional
flexibility to be replaceable by some more fundamental relation that would
express the restrictions on their selection. Language is everywhere expandable
and changeable; hence there is no value of a variable (say, a particular
morpheme in the V class) about which we can say that it cannot have a
particular other value of a variable in its syntactic environment (say, a
particular N morpheme as its subject). However, there may be characterizable subsets of language, such as the sublanguages for particular sciences,
in which a part ofthe vocabulary is restricted as to its syntactically environing
vocabulary. In a sUblanguage in which we can delimit the acceptability of
syntactically environing morphemes of a morpheme A in class X, we can
discover whether there are other morphemes B, C in the same class X such
that a subset p of the environments of B and a subset q of the environments
of C together equal the environment-set of A. If this is found to be the case,
we can redefine A as being two homonymous morphemes, Ap and Aq in
class X, Ap being a free variant and synonym of Bp, and Aq a free variant
and synonym of Cq • If this can be done to an important part of the sublanguage vocabulary, then instead of the relevant values of the morphemeclass variables being the morphemes A, B, C, they would be now certain
environmental subsets of morpheme occurrences, namely p, q, etc. Here the
p value of the variable X would have A and B as its freely-varying phonemic
representation, and the q value of X would have A and C as its freelyvarying phonemic representation.
When p and q are taken as the values of X, there are no homonymities:
for whereas Ap and Aq could have been considered homonymous morphemes,

350

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

now they are simply variant forms belonging to different values. And
synonymities have been eliminated: for whereas some of the occurrences
of morpheme B had been synonymous to some of the occurrences of morpheme A, now the phoneme-sequence of Bp and the phoneme-sequence of
Ap are merely variant phonemic forms of a value p. In this part of the
vocabulary, we can then characterize the values of the variable (morphemeclass) X not phonemically but syntactically, i.e. by their occurring with
particular values of environing variables (as for the subsets p of A and B
above). In this situation, the phonemic representation of the values, e.g.
the free-variant A and B forms of p, becomes part of morphophonemics,
in S-I, and is no longer part of the informational l. For morphophonemics is the change of the phonemic shape of a morpheme (as value of a
class-variable) in the environment of certain other morphemes, and the
phoneme sequences of A and ofB are the change (from zero) of the phonemic
shape of p, which is a (morphemic) value of X, in the environment of certain
values of other variables.
Syntax is initially bound to phonemes because it starts out to state the
independent restrictions on the combinability of phonemes, the sentences
being given as phoneme sequences. But in the special conditions considered
here, we would be able to define the elements not as phoneme sequences
(morphemes) but as values of variables which are characterized, purely
syntactically, as occurring with certain other values of other variables. The
co-occurrence of these values would be in I; the phonemic shapes of these
values would now be in S-I.
NOTES
An operator X yZ (Y, Z) is defined as acting on certain arguments Y, Z (written as subscripts), i.e. on certain variables on which it imposes a partial ordering of values. A sentence is produced by the words of an operator A being concatenated with the words of its
argument B; and the words of argument B being in tum concatenated with the words of
its argument C, if B have any C; and so on. In the sentence, the word-string produced by
the arguments B of A together with the arguments C of B, and so on, are the operand of A.
2 A sentence-form is a sequence of variables and constants, the constants being particular
morphemes and the variables being symbols for word- (or morpheme-) classes. The words
in the class constitute the domain of the variable. Replacing the n independent variables of
a sentence-form by an n-tuple of values from the stated domains produces a sentence S of
that sentence-form.
2& In the initial condition, A is not a sentence-set but a set of N-arguments, and in B the
Xm is not an increment but the predicate of an elementary sentence (7.2).
3 Here A is the source of B*, written A ...... B*, on the general grounds of transformational
analysis (Z. Harris, Mathematical Structures of Language, Interscience Tracts in Mathematics, Vol. 21, Wiley, New York, 1968, p. 62-3).
3& Op. cit. note 3, §§ 5.4, 5.6. 3-4.
4 Also, the sense of an ongoing act in the special use of be-ing before adjectives and nouns
(He is being clever, He is being a man) is seen in the other form: His being clever is in process,
His being a man in in process (is something going on).
1

REPORT AND PARAPHRASE

351

5 Also by the fact that this finally makes it possible to derive all occurrences of -ing from a
single source.
6 Richard I. Kittredge, Transformations and Discourse Analysis Papers, University of Pennsylvania 1969. The classifications 'perfective' and 'imperfective', introduced in this connection by Kittredge, are used here tentatively, pending further investigation.
7 In the sentence after than (or as) parentheses indicate optional zeroing; but if a word of
that sentence is omitted then this is due to required zeroing.
8 The comparative-conjunction form is also obtained when the quantified words in the two
source sentences have different positions, provided that they are the same word so that the
second occurrence has been zeroed: The number of men who read books is more than (the

number ofmen whom) you can count. More men read books than you can cOllnt.
9 The nearest we come to this is the makeshift and semantically unclear More men read
books than there are magazines which women read. A more acceptable situation of this type

is seen in (6).

12 I.e. its battery of transformations in the sense of H. Hit, 'Congrarnmaticality, Batteries

of Transformations, and Grammatical Categories', in Proceedings. Symposium in Applied
Mathematics 12, American Mathematical Society, 1961,43-50. The view presented in this
section is close to that reached on other grounds by A. K. Joshi in his Properties of Formal
Grammars with mixed types of rules and their linguistic relevance (University of Pennsylvania
1969), and in A. K. Joshi, S. R. Kosaraju, H. Yamada, String Adjunct Grammars, Transformations and Discourse Analysis Papers 75 (University of Pennsylvania 1968). Both
Mr. Hit and Mr. Joshi have also contributed valuable criticisms to the present paper.
13 Beverly Levin Robbins, The Definite Article in English Transformations, Papers on Formal
Linguistics, Mouton, The Hague, 1968.
15 This cannot be derived from N gathered and N gathered and N gathered because of the
restriction of gather to Neon.
16 H. Hit, Referentials, Semiotica, Vol. I, 2 (1969), 136-166.
17 Sh should be obtainable from SI by recognizing the trace of TJ, removing increment!
and TJ, and reapplying incrementI. It has to be shown that the increment can always be
applied even without the intermediate T, and that its meaning effect is then unchanged.
18 As was noted by Edward Sapir in his paper 'Grading' in D. G. Mandelbaum (ed.),
Selected Writings of Edward Sapir, University of California 1958, p. 122ft'.

13

A THEORY OF LANGUAGE STRUCTURE

This paper presents a theory of the structure and information of sentenes,
which consists of three fundamental relations: the ordered entry of words
into the making of a sentence; inequalities of likelihood of occurrence of a
particular nth entering word in a sentence in respect to the choices of words
entering im~ediately before the nth; and the reduction in shape of certain
words which have, upon their entry into a particular sentence, exceptionally
high likelihood of occurrence, i.e. low amount of information. The first two
relations determine the structure of a base subset of sentences which have a
transparent grammatical structure, and contain little or no grammatical
restrictions, and carryall the substantive information carried in any sentence of the language. The last relation is in general optional, and does not
materially change the information in a sentence. It introduces a secondary
grammatical complexity into sentences, and introduces restrictions, subsets,
and grammatical rules into the language. From the base sentences all the
remaining sentences of the language can be obtained by a direct application
of the stated set of reductions, in a manner suitable to the constructing and,
with certain short-cuts, to analyzing of sentences. 1

I. OPERA TORS
1. Elltry Order
The theory starts from a relation between word-occurrences in a sentence,
when the juxtaposition of one word to another is sufficient to constitute a
sentence. It is similar to the relation noted in categorial grammar;2 but the
use made of it here is different. The relation is clearest when we consider that
many sentences contain sentences, in altered or unaltered form, together
with word-sequences that are not themselves sentences. For example, the
sentences Mary phoned, John arrived are contained in: Mary's phoning ceased,3 John denies that Mary phoned, Mary's phoning entailed John's arriving,
Mary phoned and John arrived. To treat this relation, we introduce a term: If
the characterization of B involves reference to A, but the characterization of
A does not involve reference to B, A is called descriptively prior to B, and B
descriptively later than A. In the sentences above, Mary phoned is descriptively prior' to Mary's phoning ceased. The only status that ceased has in
Excerpts from American Philosophical Quarterly 13 (1976) 237-255.

352

A THEORY OF LANGUAGE STRUCTURE

353

respect to the set of sentences is that it constitutes the increment between
certain descriptively prior sentences such as Mary phoned and corresponding
later sentences such as Mary's phoning ceased. We therefore say that in the
latter sentence, ceased enters after the included sentence Mary phoned, and
that ceased is the operator (or later entry) on Mary phoned, with Mary
phoned as its argument (or prior entry). Similarly, entailed and and are
operators on two arguments: on the sentence-pair Mary phoned, John arrived.
We next consider sentences which contain no sentence as a proper part of
them, and where we cannot say that one part is descriptively prior to another. In Mary phoned, the word phoned has the same morphology as ceased,
entailed (though not as and), i.e. it receives tenses and certain other affixes
just as these operators do. And phoned occurs in the same position relative to
Mary as do all the operators relative to their arguments: namely, after the
first argument. Hence we call phoned the operator (or later entry), and Mary
the argument, in the sentence Mary phoned. The similarity of a distinguished
portion of these minimal sentences to the operators recognized above is not
essential to a theory such as is presented here; but it simplifies the theory.
Finally, we consider Mary denied that John phoned, where Mary is the
same word as was an argument in the sentence above, and denied has the
morphology and word-position of the operators above. Here denied will be
called the operator (or later entry) on the two arguments Mary, Johnphoned.
Since John phoned is itself the resultant of phoned operating on John, we can
say that the second argument of denied is not the sentence John phoned but
rather the operator phoned which had created that sentence, with that operator bringing into the sentence its own argument (John) in turn. This is
supported by the fact that the relation of likelihood inequalities (§5) which
an operator has to its single-word arguments (e.g. phoned to Mary, John,
etc.) will be found to hold also between the operators-on-sentence and the
operator which had created their argument sentence (i.e. between ceased and
phoned).
Every word-sequence formed by an operator entering into its position
next to its argument (in English, after the first of them) is a sentence. It
follows that every sentence formed as above is a partial ordering of words
(or short word-sequences) in respect to entry, i.e. to operator-relation. We
write A ~ B for "A is a later or simultaneous entry in respect to B". And if
A > (B, C), and there is no word-occurrence x such that A > x > (B, C),
then we say that A covers (or is the operator or next later entry on) the pair
B, C, which is the argument of A. Then for example (disregarding tenses):
John denies Mary phoned is denies> (John, phoned> Mary);
Mary's phoning entailed John's arriving is entailed> «phone>
Mary), (arrive> John».

354

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

Since the lowest operator with its arguments already forms a (minimal)
sentence, we can also take the whole succession of operators on it as a single
operator-sequence acting on that sentence. In John's claiming that Mary's
stealing books continued was false the operator-order is:
false> claim> (John, continue> steal> (Mary, books}}.

We can also form it by the operator-sequence false> claim> (John, continue) on the minimal sentence Mary steals books.
When a word enters the sentence as an operator, it receives in many
languages an operator-indicator (in English, -s), interpretable as present or
"timeless" tense: e.g., denies above. When an operator A becomes an argument of another operator, it receives automatically an indicator, or mark, of
its having become an argument. The main argument-mark in English is -ing
(replacing the -s), with the arguments of A in turn receiving's, of, by in many
cases (chiefly if they are what will be defined in § 2 as elementary arguments,
such as many simple nouns): Children's defacing of walls continued, The
defacing of walls by children continued, The wind's howling continued, The
howling of the wind continued. Under certain operators the argument-mark
can be that, whether, etc.: John denies that Mary phoned, John wondered
whether Mary phoned. In the case of those operators on two operators (written 000) which are semantically non-associative, these indicators prevent
ambiguity. Thus (writing S for sentence), (S1000S2)OooS3 does not mean the
same as SI000(S2000S3)' Such parentheses are unavailable in language, but
this semantic distinction is carried by the argument hood-indicators, including those on the 0 00 which has become an argument: John's phoning causing
Frank's arrival prevented our escaping, John's phoning caused Frank's arrival's preventing our escaping. The relation of these argument-indicators to
the non-associativity is clear when we note that the few 0 00 which are generally semantically associative (chiefly and, or, but, semicolon - and also the
0 operator not) do not impose the indicator on their operand nor receive it
when they are operated on - nor do they receive an operator-mark: John
phoned and Frank left and we escaped (or ... but we did not escape); and ~
John's phoning and Frank's leaving and our escaping.4
In addition, some of the operators whose argument is a pair or triple of
argument-words impose a preposition as argument-mark on their non-first
argument-words: John relies on Frank, John attributes this to Frank, John
attributes this to her having phoned. In some languages the elementary arguments (§ 2) of an operator receive suffixes (called case-endings) that indicate
their argument order: nominative for first argument-word, dative for second
or third argument-word of certain operators, etc.
0

A THEORY OF LANGUAGE STRUCTURE

355

2. Argument-Requirement Sets

We next consider the possibility of classifying words in respect to their entry
into discourses. If we ask about the likelihood of occurrence of individual
words, we find that each word, in entering as operator, has a unique gradation in the likelihood of its occurrence, in respect to the various words which
can appear in a given argument position under it. Despite the uniquencess
and gradation, a classification of words in terms of likelihood is achievable if
we distinguish zero likelihood from non-zero. Thus, slept has in its lone
argument position John, dog (John slept, The dog slept), less frequently fish,
still less tree (as in The trees slept every winter until the sap began to ./low),
more rarely but not impossibly bacteria, virus, rock (as in The bacteria slept
because of the low temperature, These rocks slept here through the ages), but
presumably never (except in linguistic discussion) because, go (as in ~ John's
returning because we phoned slept, ~ John's going slept). And entails has in its
two argument positions the pairs return, leave and win, move (as in My
winning entails our moving) but not he, me (~ He entails me). We can now
define as the nth place argument-requirement (or argument-demand) of a
given operator the set of all words which have non-zero likelihoods of occurring in the nth argument position of that operator. Thus the first-place
argument-demand of slept includes John, dog,fish, tree, bacteria, virus, rock,
but not because, go; the second-place argument-demand of entails includes
leave, move, but not me. The whole argument-demand of an operator which
has n arguments is the set of ordered n -tuples of its arguments in the n
positions: for entails, it includes return, leave and win, move, but not he, me.
We now find that only two word-sets appear in argument-demands, for
any of the operators: The whole set of operators, 0, on whatever arguments;
and the set of words, N, which are not operators on any arguments. s Thus,
the argument requirement of slept is the set of all words which are not
themselves operators (except as in note 5), and the argument requirement of
entails is the set of all pairs of operators.
To show that argument demands are indeed only Nor 0:
(I) There are operators which have both Nand 0 in one of their argument positions (e.g. John caused this and John's phoning caused this); and
there are words which have arguments in certain occurrences but not in
others (e.g. The paper tore, He papered the walls). In such cases, one form
can be shown to consist of the other plus reductions (§ II). There are also
words which have arguments in certain occurrences and not in others, without satisfying the conditions for one form to be a reduction of the other. In
English, these cases are not regular, and can best be understood as a word
appearing in two sets: e.g. The rock fell, The boat rocked; He ate a prune,
They prune the trees.

356

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

(2) Operators are not restricted to occurring on proper subsets of N or 0,
with the possible exception, in one language or another, of a few restricted
subsets which would have to be listed. Thus slept is not confined to arguments naming animals or the like. Its use with other arguments is not a
matter merely of metaphor, but also of extended and marginal meanings: a
horticulturalist may consider that his trees indeed sleep the winter and need
a particular amount of sleep. In addition; there is the use of words in altered
perceptions of the world, whether serious or in speculative and imaginative
writing: a story might have a house speaking to its inhabitants, going to
sleep, etc. True, the house is then seen as animated, but this does not change
the fact that The house slept then occurs, and not even in a metaphoric sense.
There is no member of N which can be assured of not occurring as argument
of slept. Even The vacuum slept might occur as a sentence, say in a child's
cosmology book, in a way that Go the a would not.
From this there follows: There must exist a certain subset of words, or
word occurrences in sentences, that have no arguments, since the first other
word (outside this subset) to enter a sentence can do so only if an argumentless word occurs in the sentence (even if that word is later zeroed, § 6-§ 8).
These argument-less words are the elementary arguments, N, such as Mary,
rock, virus. In addition, if a language has any words other than elementary
arguments - and it must if it is to have sentences - it must have some words,
or word-occurrences, whose arguments are only N, since a word any of
whose arguments is itself an operator could not enter a sentence whose only
prior entries are N. These are the elementary operators: On (slept), 0nn (ate),
etc. In addition, a language can have also words, or word-occurrences, some
of whose arguments are themselves operators. These are the non-elementary
operators: 0 0 (continued), 0no (denied), etc. 04.. indicates a word whose
argument-requirement is the ordered pair B, C.
That Nand 0, without specifying subsets of them, suffice to characterize
the argument-sets of all or almost all operators is supported by the fact that
the set of argument-demands of all words is the set of all permutations of N
and from length zero to length 3 or 4. That is, there are words N with zero
argument, words On with one N argument, 0nn with two (e.g. ate in John ate
fish), 0nnn with three N (e.g. put in John put the book on the table, but not ~
John put the book), perhaps 0nnnn (e.g .... interpose .,. between ... and ... ),°0
with one operator as argument, 0 00 with two operators as arguments (e.g.
elllai/s), Ono with N and an operator as ordered arguments (e.g. denied), 00n
with the reverse order (e.g. amused in John's phoning amused me), Onno (e.g.
(old in Jo/m told Mary of Frank's phoning), 0noo (e.g. attribute in I attribute
her leaving to his phoning). These prove adequate as syntactic categories for
the language.
Although the general conditions for operator entry are as given above,

°

A THEORY OF LANGUAGE STRUCTURE

357

various languages may have a finite (and reasonably small) number of restrictions applying to particular subsets of operators. A subset of operators
may be so expected in each sentence as to be virtually required (e.g. the
before, after source of tense). In a particular subset, e.g. continue, cease, etc.,
the occurrence of one operator may preclude any other one - or itself iterated - from operating on it. However, strong as such restrictions may be in
the overt grammar of affixes, etc., they generally turn out to be only selectional (§ 5) and not rigid in the underlying word-entry operators.
Beginning merely with ordered word-entry to make a sentence, a fair
amount of structure has thus been obtained. In summary: The entry of
words into sentences depends upon the word's argument-demand; the arguments are identified only by whether they themselves have arguments or do
not have arguments, or are themselves zero, and not by belonging to particular subsets of these, or by other properties; and every resultant of an
operator with arguments that satisfy its argument-demand is a discourse
(and.a sentence). From this it follows that the set of discourses is the set of all
sequences satisfying the argument-demand relation. For the structural analysis, it is not necessary to identify the objects in the sequence as words, let
alone words of a particular type, since their condition of entry depends
entirely on their relation to objects defined in turn by their conditions of
entry.
3. Unrestrictedness

We have seen (in §2(2» that, except for special cases (below), operators are
not restricted to particular subsets of the Nand 0 arguments. We will now
see that we do not need to admit any subsets of operators distinguished by
position in respect to their arguments. That is to say, given an operator set
0bc with argument-requirement B C, it will not be the case that one proper
subset, 0'be' makes sentences only by occurring in one position with respect
to B C (e.g. B O'be C), while another, O"bc' occurs only in another position
(e.g. B C O"be)' If this were the case, operators would have to be characterized not only by their argument-demand but also by their position in
respect to their arguments, and one might think that each position indicated
something different than what would be indicated by the operator words
themselves. Many languages seem to have such position-subsets of operators; but it can be shown that there is one unrestrictive position in which
there can occur all operators (or transformational equivalents of them in a
manner indicated below) having a given argument-demand, and that any
operators having that argument-demand which are restricted to other positions can be characterized as reductions (by § II) from particular operators
in the unrestrictive position. The restriction becomes then a matter of subsets of operators receiving a reduction, rather than of subsets of operators
having different relations to their arguments.

358

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

To show this requires a rather involved discussion. We begin with two
properties of word-occurrence likelihoods: (1) For each operator word,
some words in its argument-demand are more likely to occur as its arguments than are other words in the set; this likelihood-gradation differs from
one operator to another, and is related to its meaning, as in the more and
less likely arguments of slept. Similarly for arguments, in respect to operators on them. (2) For certain 0 00 (e.g. cause), what is most likely in the
arguments is that their second argument or some argument further down
under it, even if zeroed, should be the same word as their first argument or
some argument under it in turn. Thus in any two sentences under cause,
word-repetition is usually present or implicit (i.e. zeroed by § 8): In The loss
of his umbrella caused him to buy a new umbrella, umbrella occurs in both
operands of caused (i.e. in the two sentences operated on by caused). In The
threat of rain caused him to buy an umbrella there is no repetition; but among
the implicit sentences, including dictionary-definitions, which could have
been joined to rain and have been zeroed are sentences such as umbrellas
protect from rain. In contrast, Its being Tuesday caused him to buy an umbrella is unlikely, as containing no overt or zeroed repetition. 6
We now raise the question of how it is that every language can express
almost any information, though each has a limited vocabulary. To see how
this capacity of language arises, consider the following: Let C1 be a particular word, e.g. house, occurring as operator or as one of the arguments in all
sentences of a set of sentences A B C1 . Some word pairs in the word sets A, B
are most unlikely with C1 ; other pairs, which are not especially unlikely, will
be marked Ai B i. Thus John built, Fire burned are in Ai Bi (yielding John built a
house, Fire burned a house), but John seated, Fire melted are not (* John seated
a house, *Fire melted a house). To each sentence of the set A B ClO we now adjoin 0 00 X Y Z, where 0 00 is an operator of the type in (2) above and X Y Z is a
particular individual sentence which is second argument of that 0 00 , In the
resultant set of sentences A B C1 0 00 X Y Z (where all symbols except A, B
indicate particular words), the members of A, B which are not especially
unlikely are not the same as those indicated by Ai B i. Thus, let 0 00 X Y Z be
(a) which is made of snow where 0 00 = semicolon plus wh- (relative clause)
and X Y Z = house is made of snow, with -ieh as pronoun for house; or, with
reductions, (b) made of snow. The more likely A, B pairs here, marked A; B;,
include John built, Fire melted (as in John built a house made of snow, Fire
melted a house built of snow), while other pairs such as John seated, Fire
burned are not in Aj Bj (*John seated a house made of snow, *Fire burned a
house made of snow). The difference between Ai Bi and Aj B j arises because
under the 0 00 there exists greater likelihood for those A B words which are
semantically related to the fixed X Y Z words. Thus the particular wordsequence C1 0 00 X Y Z determines a different likelihood-gradation in A B

A THEORY OF LANGUAGE STRUCTURE

359

than does C1 alone: Aj Hj instead of Ai Hi' Indeed, by (1) above, C1 0 00 X Y
Z acts like a new member occupying the C position in A H C. In this way,
grammar creates word-sequences that do the work of an indefinitely expandable vocabulary. Today, English vocabulary contains a word igloo,
borrowed from Eskimo, which determines approximately the same operators on it (and co-arguments under those operators) as does house made of
snow. But the possibility of having the likelihood-gradation which is characteristic for operators on igloo (and so the meaning of that word) did not
require the existence of that word in English; it was available for house made
of snow.
To return now to the restrictive positions of operators. Most operators 0 0
on a sentence, hence on an operator, occur after their argument, e.g. continued, is an art, in John's solving puzzles continued, John's solving puzzles is
an art; these will be indicated here by O~. Only a few, O~, occur at an interior
point of their operand, between their immediate argument and its argument
in turn: e.g. the auxiliaries can, may, etc., and also such verbs as continued, in
John can solve puzzles, John may solve puzzles, John continued solving puzzles. Following the discussion above, for every O~ with its particular likelihood-gradation on its operand sentences, it is always possible to find a
paraphrasing O~' 0 00 X Y Z such that the likelihood-gradation which it
imposes on its operand sentences differs from the likelihood-gradation imposed by O'~ and approaches that of the given O~ as closely as we wish. The
only question that might arise is if the O~ have a restrictive grammatical
property (aside from their individual likelihood-gradations) which does not
hold for the O'~. Indeed, the O~ carry a special reference to the first argument
of their operand sentence: continued refers to John more directly in John
continued to swim than in John's swimming continued. However, the fact that
we can adjoin to a sentence metalinguistic references to any part of that
sentence (§§ 4 and 16) assures the possibility of adjoining to the selected O'~
0 00 X Y Z a metalinguistic statement giving it the O~ property. Thus for
continued in O~ we may was continued by the subject; for can in O~ we may
say is a capability of the subject's (John can swim, John's swimming is a
capability of the subject's). In contrast, we cannot construct in the more
restrictive 0 ~ position a paraphrase of each O~', because no metalinguistic
statement on O~ words can remove from them the special property (the
subject reference) which adheres to being in the O~ position.
It follows that for each argument-demand, there is a position, which in
English is found to be always after the first argument, in which every operator having that argument-requirement either itself occurs or else has a
paraphrase which is equivalent to it in likelihood-gradation and metalinguistic properties. It will be seen below that in English the equivalents in the
post-first-argument position satisfy the conditions for being the base form in
respect to which the restricted operators are reductions (transformations).

360

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

Thus we can say that the post-first-argument position is unrestricted, containing all operators; and that for some operators there take place reductions (e.g. to can) which send them to another position, the reductions being
restricted to particular members of the operator set.
We have thus arrived at a system of operators which are not restricted, in
respect either to subsets of their arguments or to the position of the operators. There may nevertheless remain, in a particular language, certain subsets of operators which are restricted. Thus, for a particular set of operators
which are restricted in their position (such as the English auxiliaries), or in
their ability to occur under certain further operators (such as the aspectually-selective verb stems in Slavic languages), it may be difficult to find
satisfactory unrestricted paraphrases; or these paraphrases may be too complex or metalinguistic. Also, some sets of operators may be such that even in
their most unrestricted paraphrase they cannot iterate with themselves or
with each other. In all these cases, we are dealing with specifiable subsets of
operators whose members have (approximately) identical or complementary
inequalities of likelihood of occurrence in respect to another specifiable
subset of operators on them (e.g. certain operators describing number, durativity); and the members of the subsets would have to be listed.
4. MetatextualOperators

There are a few operators or operator-argument combinations which differ
from all others in that they name the entry-order of a word in the sentence
on which these operators are acting: that is, they refer to a word within their
own argument, and will be termed 'metatextuaI' (or 'metadiscourse'). Such
referring clearly exists in language, e.g. He likes Mozart and Bach, but I
prefer the latter, where latter refers to the position of the word Bach. The
possibility for such referring is inherent in the ordering of word entry,
mapped (though with various changes, § II) onto the linear order of words in
a sentence. The presence of metatextual operators may be seen if we consider, say, A glass tipped and a glass fell. If we want to give the information
that the two glasses are the same, it is possible to use the inherently available
address: tipped and fell are the first and second arguments, respectively, of
and; glass is the (first) argument of each of these. Then under and we address
tipped as 1, fell as 2, the first glass is 1.1 and the second is 2.1. The information about sameness here would be given by having on and an operator has
the same referent (or indicates the same individual) whose arguments are the
contents of the addresses 2. I and 1. I. With this sameness-operator we obtain
reductions to A glass tipped, and it fell or to A glass tipped and fell. These
operators may seem to be peculiarly complex and merely a figment of
theory, but they are inescapable for a simple analysis of language. For, as
will be seen in § II, such operators yield in a natural way the phenomena of

A THEORY OF LANGUAGE STRUCTURE

361

zeroing and pronouning, without appealing to any grammatical apparatus
beyond what exists otherwise in grammar. Without these operators, one
would have to announce the fact and conditions of zeroing and pronouning
in various grammar-statements, i.e. statements made in the grammar about
the sentences of the language. However, if we consider such grammar-statements (which are themselves English sentences), then we see that their information can be given by metatextual operators of English attached to the
very sentences which the statements are describing. Naturally, the information about sameness cannot be given until the two words which are the
same have both entered the sentence: hence we need an 0 0 operator ( ... has
same ... ) on the 0 00 (and) which had brought the two words together in the
sentence. This 0 0 sameness-operator can also act on 0 nn (e.g. on John washed
John) in which case it leads not to zero but to self-pronouns: John washed
himself. And when the sameness-operator specifies which words are the
same, the simplest way of addressing them is by their entry-order in the
operator history of the sentence; the word-order in the sentence derives from
this, but in a complex way.
Particularly important are the wh- pronouns, which create the relative
clause, and all those sentence-segments that the grammarians would call
modifiers - whether on noun, or verb, or sentence, or whatever. They also
underlie all cross-reference. Operators on a sentence can become parts of a
'noun-phrase' or any similar 'word-phrase' (i.e. a word with its modifiers)
only via these. Syntactically, these wh- words are the form that pronouns can
take when they follow semicolon, which is an 0 00 connecting two sentences: The man who had been here left from semicolon on a sentence pair:
~ The man left; The man had been here, with pronouning of the second man
into who. 7 The pronouning, of course, arises from a sameness-operator on
the two occurrences of man: The man left; the man had been here; 2.1 indicates the same individual as 1.1. Similarly, The man whom I saw left is a
reduction of The man left; 1 saw the same-as-1.1 man. ~ The man left; I saw
the man; 2.2 indicates the same individual as 1.1.
Introducing a sameness-operator as a base for zeroing and pronouning
makes it possible to obtain these as reductions from a meta textual operator
inside the base sentence (§ III) with no apparatus of operators and reductions beyond what is in any case needed to obtain the referential effect of
words such as latter. Nevertheless, it makes the base sentences look artificial.
Instead of this, one could therefore take pronouns not as metatextual changes (it for glass), but simply as words of referential or deictic meaning: he
meaning "a known or mentioned male person," etc. And instead of some,
but not all, zeroing we could have and acting on operators or arguments
before these meet (tipped and fell acting together on glass). Such analyses
would make the base closer to the usual language, but would reduce the
simplicity of the system that can produce all sentences.

362

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

5. Likelihood-Inequalities

The crucial relation in language structure, after the sentence-making ordered entry, is the fact that every operator-word has a particular likelihoodgradation, more precisely inequalities of likelihood, for the words in each of
its argument positions, and vice versa. Since we can hardly measure the
likelihoods of, say, each N's occurring under slept, and so on, we have to
deal with the estimate oflikelihood as made by speakers of the language, i.e.
with the presumed frequency of occurrence. Even so, no precise data can be
obtained for all N in a particular position, but it is sufficient to work with
several grades such as especially low (vanishingly small) likelihood (e.g.,
under slept, for vacuum), rather low likelihood (e.g., for ocean, rock as in The
oceans slept), somewhat-Iower-than-ordinary likelihood (The flower slept),
ordinary likelihood (The boy slept); the last (ordinary) is often called the
selection for the given verb in the given position. In addition, some operators have words which are exceptionally likely to occur as their arguments,
e.g., to be here as argument of expect (§ 7). One may think of intermediate
grades, as for The tree slept Gust below ordinary likelihood?), and one may
be uncertain in some cases (e.g., does earth have ordinary likelihood under
slept, as in The earth slept under the blanket of snow). The gradation is, of
course, related to meaning, but by no means precisely, not only because of
meaning extension and explicit metaphors, but also because of the special
frequency of certain literary expressions (e.g., The earth slept), and so on.
While the likelihoods themselves change readily in time and differ as among
speakers, the gross classification is more stable. Above all, the inequalities in
likelihood are preserved under transformations (below).
Instead of speaking of inequalities of likelihood for the arguments of an
operator, one can speak of what further operators on the given operator
(which, as in § 7, includes what context of neighboring sentences, etc.) would
make a particular word not low in likelihood. For not otherwise specified
likelihoods, this context is ordinary speech and writing. For specialized
word uses, e.g., in science, this context is the neighboring material of scientific articles or conversations. For certain kinds of rare word uses, such as in
The saucer laughed, the context can be neighboring fairy-tale sentences. And
for ungrammatical word sequences (i.e. ones not satisfying the argumentdemand relation) the context is a metalinguistic operator such as word (as in
He said "Go the a," reduced from He said the words "Go the a"; note that
one cannot say ~ He said that go the a, which is not reduced from a zeroed
operator word, and in which go the a would be therefore occurring not under
a metalinguistic operator).
Two items of background should perhaps be given about this appeal to
likelihood:

A THEORY OF LANGUAGE STRUCTURE

363

(1) Unstructured attempts to characterize the likelihood of word-combi-

nations have failed when they related merely to neighboring words in a
sentence, or the like. But when we deal with relative likelihood (i.e. inequalities of likelihood) of arguments in respect to their operator, or vice versa, the
likelihood differences begin to fit closely with meaning differences, and to be
preserved under sentence transformation.
(2) Likelihood inequalities of operator-argument combinations do an important part of the work of indicating the grammaticality of sentences, i.e.
approximately the work of characterizing which sentences are in the language. Students of language have avoided considerations of frequency and
likelihood, because these were thought to be unrelated to structure. Thus,
there are some sentences which one is certain were never said, but which are
immediately understood as grammatical: e.g. Some blue and mauve onionskin shot through the air at 759.06 miles per second. However, such unlikely
yet fully grammatical sentences have a particular relation to likely sentences:
likely sentences can be formed immediately from these by substituting classifiers for the specific words and adding sentences stating that the specific
words are cases of those classifiers. Thus we can form: Some colored solid
object shot through the air at a particular velocity; Blue and mauve are colors;
Onion-skin is a solid object; 759.06 miles per second is a particular velocity.
There are other kinds of sentences whose likelihood seems unrelated to
their grammaticality. Here too, it is possible to find that the different ways
and degrees of a given sentence's grammaticality correspond to different
sentences of non-low likelihood to which the given sentence is syntactically
related. Thus new or far-fetched metaphors, jocular and nonce uses of
words, and marginal sentences whose grammaticality is uncertain, can all be
characterized as particular kinds of combination of, or departure from,
corresponding sentences of ordinary non-low likelihood. s
The likelihood-inequalities of arguments for each operator, and viceversa, differentiate the operator words and their meanings. Some operators
have special properties in this regard, by virtue of which they can be collected into subsets in respect to selection. Thus, some have very broad selection,
i.e. most or very many of the words in their argument-demand have non-low
likelihood of occurring under them: e.g. under before, after more different
words are likely to occur than under to the right of, on top of Some have
each a favored ('appropriate') argument which is the most likely one under
the given operator, e.g. to be here under expect (§ 7). For some, what is most
likely is not that the argument should contain particular words rather than
others, but that there be some word which occurs in each of their arguments,
at whatever depth: so for the 0 00 in §3. There are also cases of various
operators having similar likelihood-gradations. Thus the selections of before
and after are very similar though not identical; similarly as between is more

364

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMA TIONAL LINGUISTICS

than, is less than, equals. Certain 0 00 (chiefly and, or) havejn common the

property of being often semantically commutative and associative; their
non-commutative and non-associative occurrences can be obtained from
zeroing such words as then (§ 7). That is to say, He is tired and he is hungry
means much the same as He is hungry and he is tired; and if the arguments of
and are He is hungry and he is tired, He is sleepy the resultant sentence and
meaning are the same as if the arguments are He is hungry, He is tired and he
is sleepy: both yield non-ambiguous He is hungry and he is tired and he is
sleepy.
There are subsets of operators some of whose members have similar selections, while others have contrasting selections. Thus a number of 0 0 operators have in common the following properties: they have a broad selection;
and the likelihood-gradations of their arguments are much the same under
all of them. Other 0 0 operators have a likelihood-gradation for arguments
which is almost the reverse of that for the set above. Thus under lasted,
continued, we find that eat has ordinary likelihood and arrive low likelihood:
His eating continued, but hardly His arriving continued; but under occurred,
was sudden the likelihoods are reversed: His arriving was sudden, but hardly
His eating was sudden.
Certain operators, is a word, is a sentence, is an 0no operator, etc., are
uniquely distinguishable in language analysis, and form the base for the
metalanguage, even though they may have in the language itself a status not
different from that of other classifiers such as is a mammal, is an atom. This
is because their argument selection is approximately the set of all words, all
sentences, all 0no words, etc., respectively. However, the arguments are precisely determined only in the field of language-analysis, where we consider
only the arguments which together with is a word or the like make a scientifically reasonable sentence (Book is a word, but not She spoke is a word). In
the language itself one can find It is, in two words, impossible, and other nonword arguments of is a word, just a one can find A whale is a big fish. These
classifiers, even the meta linguistic ones, do not form clear-cut subsets of
operators in the ordinary language.
These various argument-likelihood properties give a texture of similarities
to the operators on a given argument-demand. Except as noted at the end of
§ 4, they fall short of creating subsets of operators, because for many of the
properties there are operators which have the given property to a lesser
degree or in a different manner than the other operators. However, they
have the effect of creating semantically important, though fuzzy, categories
of the operands: e.g. durative verbs (eat) as against momentaneous (arrive).
And these properties are structurally important in being the basis for the
reductions (§ II).
It must be stressed that the likelihoods are not used directly in constructJ

A THEORY OF LANGUAGE STRUCTURE

365

ing a grammar. The major use is that preserving the inequalities of likelihood - in a specified way - is a proved criterion in determining the transformations of a language (§ III). For the rest, the discussion of likelihoods
has an interpretational status, in characterizing the transformationally-established reductions.

II. REDUCTION
The importance of the sentence-making operations described above - the
word-entries satisfying their argument-demands, the argumenthood-indicators, and the likelihood-inequalities - is that all remaining sentences of the
language can be obtained from these by a few physical types of reduction in
the shape, or relative position (relative distance), of the words which enter a
sentence (§ 8). The great bulk of reductions can be made on an operator, or
its argument, if one of these has exceptionally broad selection or exceptionally high likelihood of occurrence in respect to the other, or if it otherwise
contributes little or no information at its point of entry in the construction
of the sentence. The reductions are thus not arbitrary changes. Most or all
have a common property, based on the relative likelihood property of the
operator-argument relations, of reducing high-likelihood low-information
entries. It is also found that all, or most, of the changes (which will be seen
below to constitute sentence transformations) can be best obtained if we
assume that the reductions are carried out as the operator enters the sentence or as the specified conditions for the reduction come to be satisfied by
the sentence as so far constructed. This greatly simplifies any computational
or effective procedure for sentence transformations. It means that if a reduction has taken place on a given operator, the next operator to enter the
sentence enters upon the reduced form of the earlier operator.
Not all low-information entries occasion a reduction. These have to be
discovered in each language, although some types are widespread. There are
three main types of reduction: zeroing and pronouning for operators or
arguments which have certainty or highest likelihood of occurring at a particular point in the construction of the sentence (§ 6-8); affixation and intonation in the case of operators which have broad selection in the language
(§ 9); moving of metatextual material to the address to which it refers (§ 10).
All reductions, including zeroing, leave a trace which is seen in the entries
immediatelly environing the one which was reduced. Where there is no such
trace, no reduction is defined.
6. Pronouncing and Zeroing for Repetition in the Discourse

The metatextual 0 0 which assert sameness of two addressed arguments (§4)
make one of the occurrences of the repeated word certain, given the other

366

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

occurrence, as in the two occurrences ofI glass in § 4. The identity of the word
at the given location can therefore be dispensed with, as being recoverable
from the assertion of sameness on two addresses. In some situations, especially when the other address is unrestricted (i.e. when the other occurrence could be anywhere under the metatextual operator), the repeated word
can receive a shape which is tangible but which is not individual to that
word: a pronoun. E.g. for John's winning was due to John's endless training
(plus sameness-operator) we have both John's winning was due to his endless
training and His winning was due to John's endless training. 9 In other cases,
especially when there is a fixed entry-relation, hence fixed initial distance,
between the two occurrences of a word, the repeated word can receive zero
shape. 10 E.g. from A glass tipped and a glass fell (plus sameness operator) we
have A glass tipped and fell; from He will buy a book if she will buy a book
(where the sameness-operator is stated about the entering words, not the
individual referents) we have He will buy a book if she will. Although the
occurrence of the repeated word is certain, given the sameness-addresses,
different sentences with different sameness-addresses may yield the same
pronoun locations, or the same word sequences after zeroing. Hence ambiguities arise among sentences, i.e. degeneracies of word-sequences in respect to the ordered word entries: e.g. I left him feeling sad from I left him, I
feeling sad, and also from I left him, he feeling sad.
7. Zeroing for Highest Sentence-Entry Likelihood

When an operator enters upon its arguments to make a sentence, the argument can be zeroed if it is by far the likeliest (the 'appropriate') argument for
the given operator; or the operator may be zeroed as most likely or appropriate on its argumentsY
A simple example is the argument of expect. The second argument of
expect is generally an operator (equivalently, a sentence): We expect their
departure at 6, We expect them to depart at 6. However, we also find certain
elementary arguments as second arguments: We expect John. The inequalities of likelihood for N as second argument of expect are approximately
those for N as argument of is here or the like: John is here, *Time is here,
* We expect time. Also, if for each sentence having N as second argument of
expect we form a corresponding sentence having N to be here as second
argument of expect, we find the two corresponding sentences to have approximately the same inequalities of likelihood for various further operators
on them, i.e. for various contexts. The two inequality-similarities above are
precisely the conditions for one form to be a transform of the other (§ III),
and we can consider to be here to have been zeroed under expect, as being
the most likely argument of expect.
Similarly, under the operator say, whose last argument-position can be

A THEORY OF LANGUAGE STRUCTURE

367

taken by any operator (i.e. any sentence) but also by metalinguistic classifiers such as word, the latter have a uniquely appropriate likelihood and are
zeroable. Thus wh- operating on the pair John said words, It is late are words
produces John said the words it is late, zeroed to John said "It is late"; here
words was the second argument of said. But when It is late is itself the
second operand of said, we have John said it was late, John said that it was
late.
A simple example is the zeroing of then after and if the two arguments of
and are clearly time-ordered: He took sick and died +- He took sick and then
died. Many complex structures in the grammar are obtained with little or no
further ado by the zeroing of especially likely, appropriate, arguments.
Examples are the zeroing of amount, degree, and the like, under quantifier
and comparative operators such as increase, is more than, is less than. So also
the zeroing of moment, period, and the like, under time-order operators such
as before, after; this simplifies the grammar of tenses and aspects.
Somewhat differently, an indefinite appropriate second argument can be
zeroed under many operators: I read is a reduction from I read things or the
like. l2
8. Zeroing for Assured Occurrence or No Information

Certain operators, together with a part but not the whole of their operand,
are zero able when they are the only words that could be occurring in the
given entry position. This applies to relative-clause wh- words plus is, as in
The man here has been waiting +- The man who is here has been waiting; and
the same with the indefinite that, anything, or group or the like, preceding
such wh-words, as in I never eat her cooking +- I never eat anything which is
her cooking. This accounts for the difference between Mozart and Beethoven
wrote operas, obtained by zeroing from Mozart wrote operas and Beethoven
wrote operas, and Gilbert and Sullivan wrote operettas which must have a
different source, namely The team which was (or: contained) Gilbert and Sullivan wrote operettas,from wh- operating on A team wrote operettas, The team
contained Gilbert and the team contained Sullivan.
When will, -ed, are introduced onto the first arguments of after, before,
and period intonation onto the first argument of and, for (§ 9), then the
original portion of the operators, namely after, before, and, for can be
zeroed: He did it before is reduced to He did it. Similarly He was sleepy. And
he was hungry is reduced to He was sleepy. He was hungry.
The I say, I report (or Nl says, where Nl is the speaker) which can be
assumed on every discourse, can for that reason be zeroed. Many difficult
forms are explained by this. One can also assume that discourses carry
adjoined sentences or operators which give all the situational and definitional information necessary to the understanding of the discourse. l3 These

368

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

are zeroable because they are already known to the hearer, and thus their
having been present (as necessary explainers of the sentence) is a certainty;
the trace of each such definition is the presence (in the sentence) of the
defined word. Among the many simplifications that this assumption brings
to grammar is the fact that deictic pronouns (e.g. in This is expensive, with
this referring to something known only from the non-verbal situation) become under this assumption simply cross-referential (repetitional) pronouns: e.g. we can begin with something like We are considering an object
here. The object is expensive (under the sameness operator), reduced to We
are considering an object here. This is expensive, to merely This is expensive.
Also zeroable are operators (some with their first arguments) which are
informationless in given situations, where they are similar to the performatives discussed in the philosophy of language. It has been shown that He
asks whether it is late is reducible to He asks: Is it late?, and I requested you
that you please go to I requested you: Please go! (§9). The asks, requests
occur with various first arguments and tenses: You asked, etc., and are not
zeroable. However, I ask, I request are unique in bringing no information
into the sentence, and are zeroable. For, saying I ask you: Is it late? constitutes asking the question and thus says the same thing as Is it late? by
itself. Similarly, I request you: Please go! constitutes making the request and
is thus the same thing as saying Please go! by itself. Much in the grammar of
questions and imperatives (and wishes, etc.) is simplified when they are
taken as reduced from ask, request, etc.; and the zeroing of these operators is
reserved for the case with the informational properties noted here.
9. Broad Selection in the Language

Certain non-elementary operators, which have a good likelihood on almost
all operators of the language as their arguments, can attach affixes or intonations to their arguments; as seen in § 8, the original operators can then
be zeroed. And certain operators which have a broad selection, though not
as broad as the set above, are reduced to being affixes on their arguments;
these affix forms in most cases have no phonemic similarity to the operator,
and must thus be justified as suppletive transforms. In detail:
The time-order words, chiefly, before, after, can impose -ed, will, respectively on their first argument, A, replacing the operator-indicator -s on A.
When the -s has not been replaced, A is understood as 'present' or 'timeless'.
An efficient explanation of both the temporal and the rion-temporal uses of
the tenses (including their aspectual properties and such special uses as the
past for expressing contrary-to-fact) is obtained by deriving the tenses not
from subjective time, but from the time-order of an operator to another
operator in the sentence. As a rough example, consider (1) He will have
arrived before your return. For demonstration, we take the will as already

A THEORY OF LANGUAGE STRUCTURE

369

present, and account first for the have -ed. The source would be semicolon
plus wh- operating on (2) He will arrive and (3) His arriving is before your
return (where is is not present tense, but timeless). This produces He will
arrive, which is before your return. Here the which is before permits a pasttense marker to be added to its host arrive; and the which is is zeroable (§ 8),
yielding (1). As to the tense on the latest-entering operator, here arrive, that
results similarly from its time-order to the I say, I report which can operate on
all sentences or texts, and which is later zeroed. We begin with semicolon
plus wh- on I report his arriving and His arriving is after (or: subsequent to)
my reporting, producing I report his arriving which is after my reporting. On
this there operates a metatextual operator stating that the second report
refers to the first: I report his arriving which is after my reporting; 2.2 has the
same referent as 1.1. This permits zeroing of my reporting; together with
zeroing of which is, this yields I report his arriving after (or: subsequently).
Independently, the which is after permits a future tense marker on the host
arrive. With the coming of the tense marker, the argumenthood-indicator
changes from -ing to that, so that his arriving after changes to that he will
arrive after. When the tense marker is in, the after is zeroable; and I report
that is zeroable, yielding (2) He will arrive. 14
Tortuous as this derivation is, it shows that even the tenses express
nothing that cannot be expressed by the operators defined in this theory.
The tenses satisfy the conditions for being reductions (transformations) of
before, after, etc., in particular situations.
The operators ask, request can impose on the sentence which becomes
their operand an intonation of question (permuting tense and first-argument
word) and command respectively: He asks whether it is late. -+ He asks: Is it
late? (§8).
Except as above, discourses end in period intonation. In addition, a
number of 000' chiefly and,for, but also or, but, because, if, etc., can impose a
period intonation on their first argument: John refusedfor it was too late. -+
John refused. For it was too late. Most reductions can then not occur across
the period; but pronouning and certain other reductions can. This is sufficient to segment the discourses into sentences. Then the zeroing of and, for,
by § 8, yields John refused. It was too late.
Certain broad-selection operators, chiefly ones having the form of preposition or the negative, which enter before an argument or are permuted to
that position, can be reduced (usually suppletively) to being prefixes on their
argument: It is under normal -+ It is subnormal; It is a half circle -+ It is a
semicircle; It is less than finished -+ It is unfinished.
Certain broad-selection operators, meaning condition, state, tendency and
the like, take in English a position after their argument (in many cases by the
'compound-noun' permutation of § 10) and then reduce to suffixes on their

370

STR UCTURAL AND TRANSFORM A TIONAL LINGUISTICS

argument: His childhood was happy, via a non-used *His child-state was
happy, from His state of being a child was happy, from happy operating on
His being a child was a state. The argumenthood-indicator makes this into
The state of his being a child, His state of being a child, as it makes His being
absent is a trick into The trick of his being absent.
It appears that the affixes of English can be related in this way as suppletive (i.e. phonemically dissimilar) transforms of operators on the words
to which the affixes are then attached. In some cases (most prefixes, and
some suffixes including the -hood above), the affixes are historically not
suppletive but reduced shapes of those operators (see note 8).
10. Permutation to Referred Address

Given that each operator enters into the fixed position after its first argument, most permutations in English are cases of a metatextual operator or
second argument, which contains an address (§ 4), moving to the address to
which it refers. Thus, a semicoloned sentence (esspecially if it contains a whpronoun) moves to after its referred address: My friend returned; I had
mentioned him to you ~ My friend - I had mentioned him to you - returned.
Also My friend returned, whom I had mentioned to you ~ My friend whom I
had mentioned to you returned. When something is zeroed in the second argument of and, the residue (i.e. and with what is left of its second argument)
moves to after the last non-referred material in the first argument: John saw
Mary and John phoned Mary (under the sameness-Oo) --+ John saw and
phoned Mary. After zeroing of which is, and who is, the residue, if it consists
of certain sets of short words such as adjectives, moves to before its referred
address: The pen which is blue writes well ~ The blue pen writes well. In
English, if the residue is of the form of a preposition (chiefly oj) plus noun
(including words made noun-like by their affixes), then the preposition is
dropped and the residue moved with compound-noun stress to before its
referred address: e.g. this occurs twice in The machinery isfor the building of
roads ~ The machinery is for road-building, and The machinery for roadbuilding failed to work ~ The road-building-machinery failed to work. The
first compound-noun form here, road-building is part of an argumenthoodindicator; the second, -machinery, is from wh: machinery which is for
someone's road-building.
There are a number of 0 0 operators which appear not after their argument but before their own argument-word and after that word's argument in
turn: He stopped running (as against His running stopped); the auxilliaries, as
in He can run; the negative in He is not Greek (compare His being Greek is
not so, or the like). In some cases there are grounds for saying that 0 0 after
its argument carried a referent to the subject of that argument, and so moved
to it: His running stopped due to the subject, or the like, ~ He stopped running

A THEORY OF LANGUAGE STRUCTURE

371

(§ 3). But in other cases, such as the not, such an explanation for the permu-

tation is not available.
11. Reductions Unrelated to Amount of Information

There seem to be some reductions, perhaps only permutations, which have
no basis in low information. Such is the moving of certain short sentence-segments to before long ones: We have I saw people near him, but not * I saw
near him people. However, when long modifiers (i.e. wh-residues) are attached to people we find both I saw several uninvited people near him and I saw
near him several uninvited people. There are also special permutations for
certain adverbial words: So they say, Hardly had they come than he leftY
III. THE ENTRY-AND-REDUCTION SYSTEM
The essential. fact is that the reductions (II), when applied to the orderedentry discourses (I), suffice to characterize effectively all the sentences of the
language. Since the entries are ordered, and the reductions of a word take
place at its entry or at the entry of the immediate operator on it, or are
referred to these, we have a decision procedure for constructing and analyzing each sentence. For construction: we have particular partially (but mostly
linearly) ordered entries satisfying argument-requirement, and reductions
satisfying their specified low-information conditions. For analysis: since
zeroing is not a loss of a word but simply a zero shape for a recoverable
word, each sentence can be directly transformed and segmented into partially ordered reductions and entries. 16 The degeneracies in some pronouns,
zeroings, and other reductions, in which different reductions on different
operators yield identical word sequences, cause ambiguities; this only means
having more than one analysis for the given word-sequence, although determining the various analyses may be difficult. Aside from the local cases of
unordering among certain semicolon entries, the entries can be ordered with
their arguments in parentheses. And since every word has stated requirements (one or more) as to its argument-sequence, the entry order of words in
a particular sentence can be represented in Polish notation.
From the definitions of the argument-demand sets of words, it follows
that every sentence must contain at least one elementary argument N, which
alone can enter without prior entries; and for every n co-entering elementary
arguments it must contain one n-argument elementary operator. Hence it
contains at least one elementary sentence. And for every operator or operator-pair of whatever kind, it may contain a non-elementary operator on it.
Every operator makes a sentence. Every nonelementary operator acts on a
sentence or sentence-pair (namely, on the sentences made by the operators
which are the arguments of that nonelementary operator), and makes a

372

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

further sentence. Every reduction acts upon a sentence, and results in an
altered sentence. Thus all non-elementary operators and all reductions make
sentences out of sentences, and are transformations in the set of sentences.
The non-elementary operators are a set of transformations on the set of base
sentences S as constructed in section 1. Each non-elementary operator acts
on all sentences (since there are few restrictions, but rather inequalities of
likelihood, on the sentences in its argument positions), mapping the whole
set of sentences S into S' (onto a subset having that non-elementary operator as last entry), preserving the inequalities. Each 0 00 maps S' x S' into
S' - The non-elementary operators act also on reduced sentences, not only on
the unreduced ones of section I. But in this case there are restrictions, e.g.
there is no and on the pair: question, assertion; hence here we have only
partial transformations on the full set of sentences S', each mapping a subset
of sentences (those containing a particular low-information entry) onto
another subset (those containing the reduction), preserving the inequalities.
The way inequalities of likelihood are preserved under non-elementary operators allows for a limited amount of exceptions: as an extreme example, the
operator not changes the relative likelihoods of various kinds of sentence
(e.g. of general sentences) but preserves the inequalities of the great bulk of
ordinary sentences (John will leave, John will not leave, both normal, as
against, Vacuum will sleep, Vacuum will not sleep). In contrast, the preservation of inequalities of likelihood under reductions is much stronger, leaving
room for few word-choice exceptions.
Preserving inequalities of likelihood of operators in respect to arguments
guarantees preserving meaning in each sentence, aside from a reasonably
small number of exceptions (idioms and the like). The non-elementary operators preserve the meaning of the sentence on which they act, and add their
own meaning in respect to it. The reductions preserve the meaning and add
no objective information. They are thus more or less paraphrastic transformations. In addition, any individual sentence may have various nontransformational paraphrases based on synonyms and circumlocutions special to its words in their neighborhoods. These paraphrases do not preserve
inequalities, and do not remain paraphrases for other word-choices in the
corresponding positions.
It is for this reason that these relations were called transformations in linguistics, and the elementary sentences (each produced by an elementary
operator, and containing no sentence as a proper part) were called kernelsentences because they were the kernel of the natural mapping of the set of
sentences onto the set of transformations (as a quotient set of it relative to
having the same last operator or the same last reduction).17 Having the same
last operator or reduction is an· equivalence relation in the set of sentences,
as is also having the same ordered entries.

A THEORY OF LANGUAGE STRUCTURE

373

In particular, the reductions give rise to a partition of the set of sentences
into equivalence-classes, in each of which all sentences have the same ordered entries and objective meanings. Since almost all the reductions are
optional, each equivalence class (with certain adjustments) contains one
reduction-less sentence; any obligatory morphophonemics (note 15) is included in the reduction-less sentence. These sentences have a distinguished
syntactic form (consisting of word-entry only), and the set of them is closed
under the word-entry operation: any word-sequence satisfying it is such a
sentence. Hence we may call this set a sublanguage. Since the reductions do
not materially alter the information in a sentence, this sublanguage expresses all the objective information of the language.
It remains to consider the structural effects of the reductions. The connection of the reductions to low information brings into the language restrictions.and subclasses such as had not arisen in the word-entry process. As an
example, consider the reductions that produce tense (§ 8).
Once the tenses are understood as reduced from time-order words, we can
see how the operators which receive the tense affix become specialized into
verbs and adjectives. Operators which had a high likelihood of occurring
under before, after receive the affix directly on them, and become verbs: He
will/eave after eating, He phoned before arriving. Operators referring to more
stable events are less likely to be time-ordered to other operators in the
sentence (except to I say); these receive the affix indirectly, on a carrier be,
and become adjectives: The river is long, He was peculiar. (The was here is
from before my saying this). While adjectives such as peculiar can occur with
a before which relates them to some other operator in the sentence, as in He
was peculiar before she met him, they are much less likely to do so than are
the operators which become verbs, such as phoned.
We can now see why assigning reduced forms to high likelihood, lowinformation, operators creates restrictions and subclasses. The reason is that
operators are complexly graded as to likelihood, whereas a reduction permits in general only two grades: receiving the reduction, and not. Hence a
conventional cut-off point must be imposed on the graded operators, as a
boundary for recipients of the reduction. As a result, restrictions are created:
the reduction is applied restrictedly only to one member of the operator or
argument class, or to a subdomain of it whose members have to be listed or
characterized. Thus, subclasses are formed: a given set of operators is divided into those that receive the reduction and those that do not. For example, the directness or non-directness of tense attachment was seen to
depend upon the operator's likelihood of occurring under before, after; and
it serves to separate out verbs from all other operators. But while the likelihood of an operator's being under time-ordering is graded and in part uncertain, the recipients of direct attachment are a single subset. The inevitable

374

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

borderline cases are decided somewhat arbitrarily but definitely; sleep is a
verb, ill is an adjective. Other languages have much the same verb-adjective
system, but the borderline decisions may be different: ill a verb, sleep an
adjective. 1s
We have here the characteristic properties of social conventions: a useoriented graded human activity; and an organizing of some feature of it,
which in so doing makes arbitrary decisions that have to be maintained by
convention. More than this, many of the language conventions, even though
no social interests or class control lie behind them, are institutionalized into
rules, such that a departure from them is an error. It is here that rules come
into grammar: to say He illedis a 'mistake' in English, not just a nonsensical
yet possible sentence such as Vacuum ate cassettes.
NOTES
The writer's deepest thanks are due to Henry Hiz for major criticisms of this paper, and to
Danuta Hiz for many valuable comments on precision of the analyses and formulations.
2 See Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz, 'Die syntaktische Konnexitiit', Studia Philosophica 1, 1-27 (Syntactic Connexion, pp. 207-231, in Storrs McCall (ed.), Polish logic 1920-1939, Oxford 1967);
Joachim Lambek, 'The mathematics of Sentence Structure', American Mathematical Monthly
65 (1958),154-170; Henry Hiz, 'Grammar Logicism', The Monist 51 (1967),110-127; 'Computable and Uncomputable Elements of Syntax', Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science
1I1, ed. by B. van Rootselaar and J. F. Staal (Amsterdam 1968), pp. 239-254.
3 The alteration by ... '.1' ... ing, and the insertion of that here, are introduced as indicators of
argumenthood at the end of this section_
4 Note that these are approximately the operators oflogical and set-theoretic interest. The nonassociative conjunctions, e.g. because, which do not impose argumenthood-indicators, are reduced, in the manner of § 2, from the 0 00 operators which impose indicators; and these conjunctions are rarely repeated without an indicator: Frank left because John planned. thus preventing
our escaping. ~ indicates word sequences which are not sentences of the language; and *
indicates sentences of small likelihood of occurrence, or else obsolete forms. A ..... B indicates A
reduced to B.
5 There are in addition two listable sets of words in each language: (I) words which are shown
in the present theory to be reduced forms of particular operators or of word-sequences constructed by the operator-argument relation described here: e.g. the; (2) words which do not
enter into grammatical combinations, i.e. are arguments only of metalinguistic operators (§ 4):
e.g. hello, ouch (in He said: Hello.). These last are a limiting case of the sentence-making entryorder in that they can be considered as constituting a sentence by themselves.
6 Zellig Harris, Methematical Structures of Language, Interscience Tracts in Mathematics 21
(New York 1968), pp. 131-135. The finding is that in every occurrence of cause between two
sentences which is considered likely (or, in terms of hearer's response, acceptable) either such
repetition is seen, or there are zeroable (implicit) sentences, such as definitions or other likely
sentences, adjoined to one of the arguments, which supply the repetition. Such a sentence would
be The threat of rain, for which umbrellas are a protection. caused him to buy an umbrella.
Definitional sentences joined to an argument by semicolon plus wh- (relative clause) are
zeroable (ibid.. pp. 78-83, 137-138). Its being Tuesday caused him to buy an umbrella is felt as
there being no semantic connection which would explain the causal relation; but grammatically
what we see is the absence of overt or grammatically-zeroable repetition. One could explain the
causal relation by adjoining to Tuesday the sentence and rain was predictedfor Tuesday; but this
would not be zeroable by the reductions of § II. Had the sentence been Its being Tuesday, with
rain predicted for Tuesday, caused him to buy an umbrella (with zeroed which protects against
rain at the end), the sentence would seem perfectly likely, with zeroed repetition of rain.
1

A THEORY OF LANGUAGE STRUCTURE

375

7 The alternative would be to say that the segment headed by II'h- is something new, to be called
a modifier, which is added directly to a noun: as though The man who \\'as here left is formed
from left operating on The man II'ho lI'as here, and The man whom I SOl\' left is formed from left
operating on The man whom I sail' (these noun-phrases being formed in turn from who lras here.
whom I saw being added to the man). But if we consider all possible II'h-modifiers on a particular noun N, we find that they are simply all sentences containing N " with N, omitted: e,g.
was here, I saw, there is no independent structural characterization of what segments can be
added to N, ; we have to say that these segments are sentences which contain N, and in which
the N, has received zero (or -am. etc.) shape,
" Zellig Harris. Notes du cours de syntaxe, ed. by Maurice Gross (Paris 1976): and Grammar of
English on Mathematical Principles, Wiley, New York, 1981. These volumes contain data needed
to support the present theory as a grammatical analysis,
9 There is also a special pronoun from the Speaker says operator: I, you are repetitions of the
two N, respectively, in the NI says to N2 which can operate on any discourse or part of it
(below): N, says to N 2 .' N, wanted to see N2 ..... NI says to N 2.' I wanted to see you; with zeroing
of N, says to N2 (§ 8) we obtain I wanted to see you.
10 This zeroing is almost always on the second occurence, e.g, in parallel positions under the
commutative 0 00 (and, or). Repetitional zeroing occurs in specific positions of specific argument-demands e,g. also under 0no when the first argument of the operator which has become
an argument is the same as the first argument of the operator on it: for John prefers for John to
stay in (under a sameness operator) we have John prefers to stay in.
" In may cases, an operator is zeroed only after a further operator has acted on it. The zeroing
of an operator when it is the last operator to act would in many cases leave no trace of its having
been present; we might then have no evidence that it had been zeroed, The occurrence of
zeroing can also be restricted by demands on the word-sequence, Thus in English, indefinite
second arguments are zeroable, but not (in general) indefinite first arguments: I read from I read
things, but not ~ Eat too much from People eat too much.
12 The contexts of I read, i,e, the further operators on it, show that it means not all reading
activities (as in [ read everything) but reading whatever it is that one would be likely to read,
Some operators do not have this second-argument zeroing. and these seem to words which are
not likely to be said with an indefinite appropriate object: e.g, we don't say I wear,'nor is one
likely to say [wear things,
13 As an indication of this. consider the following: A grammar can be looked upon as a device
which decides which sequences of phonemes, or of words, is a sentence or discourse of the
language. and which is not. But we can take an arbitrary sequence of phonemes (satisfying the
phonemic structure of the language) and add meta linguistic operators which say e,g, that the
first few phonemes are a person's name. the next few phonemes (say, ending in a phoneme that
can be a tense suffix) are e.g, a specialized biochemical verb meaning to carry out some
particular laboratory operation, and the remaining phonemes are the name of some new-chemical compound. Then the phoneme sequence is a sentence of English. When phoneme sequences
are accepted as sentences of English without such explanations, it is because these explanations
are known to the hearer. We can assume that they existed as operators on the sentence, no less
than in the case above. but were zeroed because they were known, i.e. their presence as metalinguistic operators on the given sentence was assured.
14 This analysis provides the same base for tense-consecution and other exceptional uses of
tenses as for the ordinary tense on the main verb of a sentence.
15 The vocabulary also contains certain variants of word-form, called morphophonemic variants. which affect the shape of a word or affix under particular operators or on particular
arguments, and which are not reductions and are unrelated to amount of information: e.g.
kl1lje. knives, The obligatory transformations (which are few, if any) and the morphophonemics
are presented in the base sentences as sets of variant forms which certain words take under
stated entry conditions,
16 The partial ordering arises. in the case of reductions. from independent reductions on the
same entry. Algorithms capable of analyzing the structure of virtually all sentences of English in
the sense of the system presented here have been written. Some have been succesfully implemented as computer programs which carry out sentence anylysis. Complexities in stating the
domain of certain reductions. and degeneracies, make sentence-analysis no simple matter.

376

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

17 To establish this relation, we have to take the set of sentences, S, as a monoid (with null
sentence as identity) with and as binary composition in it. For any two sentences A, B we have A
and B as a new sentence C. The types of sentence-pairs C, D on which and is grammatically
late), are sufficiently few so that we can reunable to operate (e.g. Are you going? and
asonably put their resultant as the null sentence: C and D = null. It follows that there is a
binary composition in the set of equivalence classes E, with EA and E B = E Aand B (where E, is
the equivalence class to which X belongs). The natural mapping is then a homomorphism of S
onto E.
18 In some cases. the borderline for a reduction is not so fixed conventionally. This becomes the
ground for productivity and for marginal sentences (sentences whose acceptability is uncertain). as in such forms as The baby took a crawl over to me, extended from He took a walk, etc.
Of course. all this information about which words are verbs and which are adjectives, or which
verbs can be obje~ts of took, would have to be given in any grammar. In the present system,
these facts are relevantly organized, and some can be deduced from other facts.

rm

14

ON A THEORY OF LANGUAGE*

U. SOME PROPERTIES AND CONSEQUENCES

Many properties of sentence structure and of language follow from the
theory sketched above (paper 13 of this volume); not a few touch upon issues in philosophy. Some of the major ones are indicated briefly here.
In Respect to Word-classes

The theory recognizes only argument-demand as characterizing words: hence
only elementary arguments, and classes of operators such as are noted in the
section on entry-order. Most 'parts of speech' (verbs, adjectives, prepositions, predicate and relational nouns) are different morphological types of
operators, the differences being determined by different reductions such as
in respect to tense placing (Paper 13). Some 'particles', etc. (e.g., the) may
not be readily obtained from an operator-form, except perhaps with the aid
of meta textual operators explaining them.
The claim that every covering of (entry upon) an argument makes a sentence means that there is no non-sentence-making operator. Thus and
cannot operate on single words but only on sentences: Gilbert and Sullivan
wrote operettas does not come from and operating on Gilbert, Sullivan (with
wrote operating on the resultant), but from and operating on component
sentences: +-- A team which contained Gilbert and Sullivan wrote operettas. +-wh-pronoun on A team wrote operettas; The team contained Gilbert and the
team contained Sullivan (Paper 13). All apparent and on single words can be
thus derived, by the standard zeroing in parallel positions, from and on
sentences. This explains, among other things, why and conjoins only syntactically similar words: go and return but not ~ go and hotel.
Most morphology is seen to be due either to reduced operators or to the
operator- and argument-indicators imposed by operators. The different
forms of a word are thus in general related to each other by the different
operators under which they are occuring, even if these operators have been
later zeroed or otherwise reduced. That a noun like demand in, say, supply
and demand, is related by entries and zeroings to the verb in Someone demands something is seen not only in the fact that the noun can occur with
modifiers that are identical to the arguments of the verb (The demand for
Excerpts from The Journal of Philosophy LXX hhh No. 10 (1976) 253-276.

377

378

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

goods, People demand goods), but also in the following fact: for the noun
demand the inequalities of likelihood among its modifiers in's, and among
its modifiers in of or for are in large part similar to the inequalities of
likelihood among the first and among the second arguments, respectively, of
the verb demand (This wall demands white is less likely than People demand
goods. The galaxy demands ice-cream still less; and so is This waIfs demand
for white. The galaxy's demand for ice-cream). The difference in meaning
between the noun and the verb is due to the aspectual differences in tense
placing (i.e .. to the parts of speech) and to operators that have been affixed
or zeroed on the noun form.
Al! relations among morphemes in a word, in a sentence, are due to the
operator-argument relation. Of these: the operator-indicator and argumentindicator affixes and words (-ing, that, case-endings, etc.) are imposed by
operators. The other affixes and the intonations are reductions of operators.
In Structural Features of Sentences

All modifiers and adjuncts are obtained from those operators which are
often commutative, chiefly and, or, semicolon. This holds not only for relative clauses and adjectives, but also for adverbs (He certainly can go roughly
from He can go, which is certain), for subordinate clauses (He is angry
because they lied roughly from He is angry, which is because they lied), and
other modifiers (e.g., This is, I know, inadequate from This is inadequate,
which I know). Various special problems of these modifiers are explained
automatically by deriving them in this way. This also explains why the first
sentence is primary, in respect to the subordinate clause: it is independently
asserted, as first argument of the semicolon.
The fact that reductions can, in general, be made precisely as the operator
enters means that the altered form cannot involve any parts of the sentence
except those which were already present when the operator entered, i.e., its
operand. In particular, if the operator is permuted, it can only be permuted
to points within or bordering its operand and not elsewhere: e.g., He is angry
because they lied may be further operated on by many other operators, thus
embedding it in a long sentence, but because they lied can be permuted only
to points in or bordering He's angry and not further away; e.g., to Many
people think that, because they lied, he is angry and not Because they lied,
many people think he is angry. Modifiers on later operators would then be
further out in the sentence. That is to say, the modifiers are nested.
The reductions change the form of a sentence, resulting in a different
word-sequence from that due to the word-entry, but without losing the trace
(including zero) of the original word-entries. This permits a layered
analysis, into entries and changes. There is not just one difference of depth,
between base-sentence and resultant, but successive layers of form-change,

ON A THEORY OF LANGUAGE

379

one for each sequence-altering reduction. Each sentence, indeed, can be
computably analyzed as a semi-lattice of word-entries and reductions. 5
In Semantic Properties
It is found that every operator in the base sentence is verb-like (know, is
angry, isfather of-even if is is absent), i.e., something like a predication on
its whole argument. The semantically commutative and associative operators (and, or, semicolon) and not are not predicational. Thus the logical
operations have a unique status within grammar.
It is found that all base sentences are declarative. The interrogative form is
obtained from a disjunction of statements (related to possible answers) operated on by a declarative I ask. Thus Is he here? and Who went? are derived
from the base-form I ask you whether he is here or not and I ask you whether
X or Y or ... or Z went; correspondingly for the imperative.
Mention, as of course also direct speech, can be derived from metalinguistic operators. Something is mentioned ifit is under an operator such as
is a word. The (nonphonemic) quotation marks are optionally imposed by
such an operator on its argument, and they become important only when the
metalinguistic operator is zeroed: wh-pronoun on The word contains four
letters; The word is Mary produces The word which is Mary contains four
letters ~ The word Mary contains four letters ~ 'Mary' contains four letters.
The reduction of many broad-selection operators (i.e., operators occuring
normally with respect to very many arguments) into ambiguous or zero
affixes, and the zeroing of definitional operators of intermediate component
sentences which provide the word-repetition that is preferred by 0 00 operators, (e.g., umbrellas protect against rain, Paper 13, § 3), yield in a given
sentence a stock of implicit operators and co-arguments which do not appear overtly in the resultant sentence. Therefore, in the problem of how a
sentence can be characterized by its consequence-sentences,6 one can say
linguistically that a great many of the consequence-sentences are implicit
components of the given sentence. That is to say, operators and co-arguments that are known independently of the special information given in the
sentence and, in some cases, operators and co-arguments that have very
broad selection and high likelihood are zeroed or reduced in the sentence,
leaving their information to be delivered without their explicit presence.
Their presence can then be reconstructed as a consequence of the sentence,
plus knowledge that is common relative to the information in the remaining
sentence.
The reductions also distinguish the well-defined grammatical paraphrase,
which is created by the reductions and is limited by their possibilities, from
synonymies that are due to selectional similarity between different words in
particular environments (or between one word and another word-plus-mo-

380

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

difier). And they distinguish the well-defined grammatical ambiguity, which
is due to degeneracy of reductions (different reductions on different entries
producing identical word sequences), from vocabulary ambiguity, which is
due to the complex selection that a word may have.
In Respect to Meaning

When the structural relations in language are analyzed as far down as
possible, the connection between structure and meaning suddenly becomes
sharp. It is then seen that every grammatical relation has a constant meaning
in the sentences in which it occurs: the next-later entry is a predicate on its
arguments; the modifiers are second predicates on their host, as is natural
since they are formed by a semicoloned second sentence containing a second
occurence of the host word. The differences of likelihood of an operator in
respect to its argument words relate closely to the meaning differences
among those words; but not precisely, because of idiomatic uses and the
like. The restrictions and subclasses in grammar are (perhaps surprisingly)
not necessary for carrying information, and do not express differences in
substantive information, as is evident from the fact that they are introduced
merely as domains for the reductions. Every change in meaning of a word,
under affixes or under particular kinds of operator, is the effect of the operator on it even if that operator has become an affix or has been zeroed.
Looked at the other way, linguistically usable meanings (in principle,
identifiable in a dictionary) are those of words or words-with-modifiers
(Paper 13, § 3) together with the semantic effect of operators or arguments,
even if these have been zeroed, on the given occurrence of the word.
Abstract notions (e.g., truth, improvement) are for the most part sentencescommonly just the operators of those sentences with their indefinite arguments zeroed - carrying argument-indicators: roughly, improvement +- improvement of things +- Things improve. For some operators, e.g., wear (aside
from a few idioms), there is no conventional zeroing of appropriate indefinite arguments (e.g.,? 3 People wear things, ~ People wear); then there
is no term for the general notion expressed in that operator. Similarly, it is
hard to fix a general meaning (independent of particular arguments) for
some operator if it cannot occur normally with indefinites as arguments;
these would make the operator syntactically broad in its relevance, and,
being zeroable, can leave the operator nominalized as an abstract term. For
example, if the sentence uses a semantically narrow verb, which can be used
only with a small set of arguments, it is hard to g~ve to the meaning of the
sentence a general characterization, even if the sentence was exemplifying a
general idea. Thus if we consider stories or jokes whose manifest content is
irrelevant to the idea they are communicating, say stories about how an
event is seen differently by differently placed observers, we may find that

381

ON A THEORY OF LANGUAGE

there is no conventional operator (say, *reportorial subjectivity) that summarizes the point by having a zeroable indefinite argument, hence, no term
(nominalizing that operator) which conventionally expresses the point of
those stories; there is no way of looking up such stories under some index
term.
Given the structural sources seen above, and their relation to meaning, we
see that language expresses and transmits information, what is said about
something; but it is limited in what meanings it can be express beyond that.
More generally, the relation of structure to meaning helps to explain what it
is that language cannot express in any direct structural way. For language is
clearly a mechanism for declaring information (including one's doubt about
the information, etc.), and not for expressing feelings or the like. Happiness
is expressed by asserting I am so happy, an assertion which may be false and
thus not express happiness. The intonation on that statement, which indeed
expresses the feeling, is not phonemically distinguishable, and hence cannot
be incorporated into the grammatical structure, in any system of grammar.
Somewhat differently, greetings can be expressed by How are you? (from I
ask you how you are) although the meaning of the sentence as grammatically
constructed is not the meaning of the greeting; or else by direct expression
such as Hi! which cannot be fitted into the grammar except trivially as the
argument of metalinguistic operators (He said: Hi; Hi is a word).

a

Structural Correlates of Grammatical Properties

One feature of the present theory is that many properties of grammar are
made explicit, and can be located as arising at particular points of the sentence structure.
Thus the concept of environment or neighborhood, which has long been
essential in grammar - a word occurs or a form changes in a particular
environment - is found to be explicitly the operator-argument relation: the
likelihood of an argument-word depends on the operator, often with its coargument, i.e., the other argument-word of its operator; a reduction in a
word depends on a particular operator on it.
The distinction between base and other sentences sets boundaries between
(a) information and (b) nuance or grammatical paraphrase; between the
variable use-oriented likelihood of (base) word-combination, and the relatively fixed conventional (paraphrastic) reductions of forms; between the
relatively unrestricted possibilities of combination without word-subclasses,
and the restriction-laden subclasses of reduction rules.
We also see explicitly what is presserved under transformation. Transformations in the set of sentences are: (a) the non-elementary operators,
which, starting with the elementary sentences, construct the remaining sentences of the base; and (b) the reductions, which, starting with the sentences

382

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

of the base, construct all remaining sentences. What is preserved is: the
words in their entry order, even if in reduced or in zero shape (the entry
shape being always recoverable); the inequalities of likelihood of each operator in respect to its arguments; and - related to this - approximately the
meaning of each operator-argument entity. Truth value is preserved under
reductions, but not under further operators (e.g., It's late versus He denies
it's late).
It is particularly important that the system here outlined fits into the fact

that language is a structure always, if only slowly, in change. The fact that
many reductions hold for only a subset of an argument domain leaves room
for productivity, extending the reduction to other argument-words in the
domain. The extensions can have a consistent direction over centuries, leading to large structural and transformational features of a language: e.g., the
extension of the passive in English, or the extension of the -ing argumenthood-indicator (so that now almost every English sentence can be nominalized without the tense form).
One can see here the struggle between form and content, which is played
out in the domains of the reductions. For example, the wh-pronouns, which
serve both as relative clause and for the disjunctions in a question, cannot
refer to the operators immediately under the semicolon but only to arguments under these in turn. Hence I ask whether John arrived or . .. or Mary
arrived-'> I ask who arrived (with who from whether John or . .. or Mary); but
in
(9) I ask whether John will walk or . .. or John will drive

we cannot reduce whether walk or . .. or drive to a wh-pronoun. Nevertheless, we find a solution in the language: I ask what John will do, whose form
must come from something like I ask whether John will do one thing or . .. or
John will do another thing (with what from whether one thing or . .. or another
thing, i.e., from the second argument of do). This is circuitous, and do walking
does not appear in the answer John will walk, etc. But without this circuitous
form, there would be no interrogative on verbs. Note that in the fuller (base)
form, e.g., (9), the problem does not arise; it arises only in the reduction to
wh-pronouns.
What is not changed is the unrestricted entry structure. An example of
how such change fails to materialize is the following: English had 0 00 operators can, may, etc. which ceased to have the subject (first argument) of their
second argument different from their own subject. From a verb meaning
roughly know as in He knows how one can do this there was a development to
He knows how to do this with the subject of do always the same as that of
know: yielding e.g., He can do this. As a result, the environment of can is
now different from that of other English operators. However, in this en-

ON A THEORY OF LANGUAGE

383

vironment it turns out that can has a standing as though it were a suppletive
reduction from an 0 operator, approximately is an ability of the subject's
(as in His doing this is an ability of the subject's), with the metatextual
reference causing the permutation of that suppletive form can (as in the
latter part of § 3 in Paper 13). Thus the arising of a new form, the exceptional
position of can, did not give can any new kind of grammatical relation, for
which indeed there is no room in the argument-demand theory. It merely
shifted can from having one argument-demand, 0no' to being a suppletive
form of another, 00.
The processes and entities of the present theory also relate differentially to
degrees of universality, i.e., to what is more common as among the languages of the world and what is less so. What seems to be universal is that
sentences are constructed out of words that can enter only if their argumentdemand is satisfied, although in some languages the elementary words are
themselves composite, with roots and added phonemes that have grammatical status. Also universal seem to be: having elementary sentences, and
then operators that extend these; having inequalities of likelihood for operators in respect to arguments; having the possibility of metatextual operators; and having reductions, which are at least in part for low information.
Less universal but very widespread are the main types of reduction, e.g.,
pronouning and zeroing, and, less so, affixation. Languages differ considerably more in the specific reductions and in the detailed conditions for them;
and jn any nonreductional transformations that may exist (such as stylistic
permutations). Also, the transformations that are hardest to formulate or to
derive as successions of the elementary reductions are in most cases those
which are (at least in detail) unique to a single language. A greater difference
among languages is in what is structurally less important: the vocabulary,
which is to say, aIlocating among different words the likelihoods of occurrence in respect to operators (i.e., the distribution of meanings among
words). And the greatest difference among languages is in the phonemic
composition of the words, which is syntacticaIly least important. The differences in respect to main types of reduction (e.g., affixation) yield the main
morphological types of languages (e.g., agglutinative, synthetic).
0

III. THE OVERVIEW OF THE GRAMMAR

The Grammatical System
The set of sentences produced in the section on entry order is a subset of the
set of sentences of the language and is closed under the entry-by-argumentdemand relation; hence it is a sublanguage. The subset sentences exist in the
language in all or most cases (rather than being replaced by reduced forms),
because all or most reductions are optional. Since the reductions cannot

384

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

materially change the meaning of the words on which they act, although
they can introduce degeneracies, this sublanguage carries all of what we may
call the 'objective information' that is expressible in the language. It is also
the base for the remaining sentences of the language. The sublanguage is the
set of all sequences of arbitrary objects satisfying a particular relation, that
of requiring as condition for their entry into the sequence the prior entry of
other objects indentified only by their, in turn, having such conditions for
entering. [The interpretation being that each enterer speaks (predicates)
about its prior enterers.] The sublanguage is therefore particularly amenable
to mathematical characterization. On this sublanguage there is defined a
further property: inequalities of likelihood for each nth-entering object (an
operator word-token) in respect to those entering immediately before the
nth (its arguments). This property then serves as the condition for a set of
shape-reductions in certain entering words which have a high likelihood of
occurrence in respect to their operator or argument; these reductions (with a
few additional transformations) yield the remaining sentences. The interpretation is that the words being reduced contributed little or no information at
their entry. The reduced shape is roughly paraphrastic to the original form.
To see how this sub language serves as a base for the whole language,
consider a particular partition of the set of sentences, one in which all
members of an equivalence class have the same word-entries (including
transforms of these words): e.g., one equivalence class would include John
saw Mary, Mary is whom John saw. Mary was seen by John, etc. (roughly). If
we consider the equivalence class whose operator at a given entry-point (say,
latest entering) is a set X of words that are transforms (reductional variants)
of each other, then that form of the members of X which is least restricted in
respect to its arguments is the base and the other forms of X-members are
considered to be reductions from it. This is unavoidable, because, if we take
as base a form that is restricted to a proper subset of X-bearing sentences,
then X-bearing sentences outside this subset would have to be constructed
additionally, since they could not be derived from the proposed base-form
which does not exist for them. Hence we take the least restricted (but not
always morphologically simplest) form as base and obtain the others as
reductions, on possibly a proper subset of the base forms. It is found that a
particular position for the operator contains its least restricted form: in
English, after the first argument. The base thus contains the freest combinability of operators with respect to their arguments, and escapes most of the
restrictions and exceptions that plague language description. The domains
of reductions are monotonic-drecreasing from the domains of argumentdemand: they apply to a stated subset, proper or not, of an argumentdemand. The presence of a reduction on a particular entry in a sentence may
block the entering of some later-entering operator in the sentence; but it

ON A THEORY OF LANGUAGE

385

cannot make possible the entering of an operator that could not enter at the
given point without the prior reduction. Hence all operator-argument ~om­
binations possible in the language are represented in the sUblanguage.
The sentences of the sublanguage have a transparent structure in ordered
entries; but the structure is complicated by the fact that certain entries are
word-sequences rather than single words (e.g., the metatextual operators).
The sublanguage is the base in that the relatively simple system of specified
reductions (Paper 16) maps base sentences onto all remaining sentences of
the language. But many of its sentences are not frequent, or 'natural', because their reduced variants are far more customary; and some of its sentences have cumbersome word-sequences as operators. Hence many of the
sentences of the sublanguage are not felt as a source from which the other
sentences are derived. However, the more frequent sentences would not
constitute an adequate base, since they have a more complex structure, and
more complex relations to the remaining sentences of the language.
Infrequent or odd as they may be, the base sentences conform to the
grammar; npthing except rules referring to likelihood could exclude from the
grammar sentences like the daggered sentence examples of Paper 15.
The various kinds of special selections (operator-argument high likelihOQds), surveyed at the end of the section on entry order, imbue the words
involved with special meanings and similarities of meaning. These properties
are in most or all cases not sharply enough delineated to create definite
subclasses of words within an argument-requirement set. Some of them,
however, provide the conditions for shape-reductions.
The reductions create what look like new relations among the morphemes
of a sentence. Under those operators which are often commutative and
associative as to meaning (and, and - differently - semicolon) they create
'modifiers' such as conjuncts (and Mary after John) and adjectives. Out of
high likelihood operators such as before, after they create affixes, e.g. tense).
In addition, zeroing and permutation make the original sentence structure
covert. Hence sentences have to be described by a complex grammar of
morpheme classes and relations, as is usually done, or else by the underlying
word-entry relation plus overlying reductions (e.g., not by a tense system,
but by a system of reductions from time-order operators). The reductions
bring in additional novelties: ambiguity (degeneracy, when in two sentences
different reductions on different operators yield the same word-sequence);
paraphrase between the purely word-entry sentences and the optional reduced sentences (but, in addition, local synonymy exists among purely wordentry sentences themselves); institutionalized rules of grammar (i.e., rules
whose breaking constitutes a 'mistake') stating reductions; and restricted
subdomains to which these rules apply. These rules make some things hard
to express in a given language without resorting to unaccustomedly cumber-

386

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

some unreduced sentences: e.g., it is hard to say something in English without specifying time and number.
The present analysis is linguistically transformational, in the sense of obtaining one sentence from another. But the transformations are taken here
not simply as the set of all possible deformations of a sentence, but as a
specified set of traceable changes (in the set of sentences): nonelementary
operators O .. o •. ; and reductions occurring only in specified inequalitypreserving conditions (and as a subset of various kinds of high likelihood,
i.e., low information). When transformations are looked upon as relations
or derivations of sentences of one set in respect to the corresponding sentences of another, attention is paid only to those which affect large sets of
sentences, such as the passive and the question. The reductions described
here, however, are stated on operator-argument tokens (hence on words
entering a sentence) and not on a whole sentence or sentence structure. As
such, they may clearly affect large or small subsets of sentences: e.g., the
widespread repetitional zeroing, as against the specific zeroing under expect.
Also, there may be successive applications of reductions (on the same or on
decreasing domains): e.g., those which finally produce the question. Those
reductions, whether single or a successive set, which apply to a large domain
are those commonly noted in transformational grammar; and in some cases
(e.g., the passive) one can see the historical development of these transformations, as a particular reduction-succession came to extend in the course of
centuries over an ever larger domain.
It should be noted that this theory begins not with morphemes, which can
be identified only by analysis, but with words; the morphemes (e.g., suffixes)
are obtained from the words by reductions, and some are introduced as
operator- and argument-indicators on words. 7 Also, what the theory first
characterizes is not sentences but discourses; the segmentation into sentences is obtained by standard reductions. A theory that characterized only
sentences would leave untreated the restrictions on sentence succession
within a discourse, and also some of the properties of pronouns. The word
repetitions and the operator-argument repetitions that constitute the connectedness of discourses, both within and between sentences, arise from the
high likelihood of repetition under conjunctional 0 00 , The present theory,
however, falls short of the full structure of discourse: discourses, and such
special types of them as argumentation, involve further restrictions on repetition and ordering of operators, beyond the repetitiveness common to
conjunctions in general.
The possibility of carrying out such an analysis on any language depends
on a few properties of language that are pervasive, and in large part essential
to language. One is that there be sentences that contain sentences, with many
sentences being formed out of a sentence plus nonsentence material. An-

ON A THEORY OF LANGUAGE

387

other is that not all individual word-opera tor-argument combinations be
equally likely. A third is that sentences be compressed where possible without
arbitrary loss of information (hence the reductions). A fourth is that metatextual statements about a sentence be able to enter as operators on that
sentence. As long as these conditions are satiffied by a language, the possibility of the analysis presented here is assured.
Comparison with Set-theoretic Systems

The adequacy of the reductions for reconstructing a descriptive source for
language shows that language does not have to be described by the general
operation of concatenation on words, or by the operation of a Turing machine, subject to complex and ad hoc restrictions. Rather, it is the product of
a particular structure, and a simple one at that. This structure brings language closer to the sentential systems of logic, in that it forms all base
sentences by predicative operators, or by not, and, or, semicolon. However,
language is essentially different in that there are inequalities of likelihood of
occurrence for each operator in respect to the words in its argument
domains, yielding the meaning of words and sentences. Language thus has
an immediate machinery for complicated meanings and for preserving
meanings as a sentence grows, but not for distinguishing truth or for preserving truth value as a sentence grows. Such problems as ambiguity and
synonymy, which in set-theoretic systems have to take account of extension
because of the special status of the null class, are treated in language neither
by extension nor by intension, but by selection: the set of verbs that occur
normally with unicorn differs from the set for centaur, and also from the set
for horse. Unicorn, centaur, horse, etc., each have a unique selection of what
operators and co-arguments have good likelihood of appearing with them;
and this selection gives each its particular meaning, independently of whethersuch objects, or pictures of such objects, exist.
Language also has a differentiating property in that it admits metalinguistic and metatextual operators into the sentence. This makes possible a crossreferencing system different from that provided by the use of variables. In
both systems, however, the cross-referencing is largely restricted to arguments, because it identifies tokens in respect to the operators under which
they are located.
IV. THE VIEW OF LANGUAGE

What has been presented above is a theory of syntax, i.e., of the grammatical
structure of sentences. However, the content of the theory is such as to
suggest certain views of language.

388

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

About the Fundamental Structure

The ability of the few relations described above to characterize those wordsequences which are sentences of the language as against those which are not
makes them merit a closer serutiny. The fundamental relations or processes
themselves are seen to fit quite functionally the conditions of language use.
The ordered sentence-making entry is a mechanism which most naturally
suits the interpretation of saying something about something. The inequalities of nth enterers in respect to their arguments constitute a mechanism for meaning distinction. We see in it how language is related to meaningdistinctions in its basic structure, but at the same time is not committed to
any particular set of meanings or view of meaning, and is open to meaning
change (by change in the inequalities of likelihot>d), and can house the
vagaries of historical accident - borrowing, idiomatic speciallization of
certain word combinations beyond the meanings of the individual words,
etc. Also, we find nowhere any mechanism for housing in language any
absolute or externally determined system of meanings, something which in
any case is not available in the perceived world except for a few small
encapsulated semantic areas such as the number system and kinship terms. 8
Some reductions, however, favor particular meanings, such as time, plurality, sex. They do this by considering the sets of operators expressing these
meanings as being particularly likely to occur and therefore as meriting
reduction.
Even the reductions are found to be not merely a choice of possible shapechanges of sentences (loosely called transformations), but specific reductions, and specifically for a subset of low-information enterers. And indeed,
although they complicate the grammar and increase the redundancy of
word-occurrence and bring in ambiguities and limit what can be comfortably said, they lead to a great abbreviation of sentences without changing
the meaning.
Furthermore, when we consider the fundamental sentence-making relations in the light of their communicational effects, i.e., of what they serve
to express, we see that the whole structure of language follows naturally
from the observable conditions of language as a human activity in the real
world. This holds even for the presyntactic component of language, namely,
the formation of words. For whereas the sounds of speech (but not the
letters of writing) are continouous phenomena whose differences from one
another are on a continuous scale, the components of words are discrete
objects, the phonemes, determined by a relation of distinguishability under
repetition. This creation of discrete elements, which is not characteristic for
behavior, is understandable, since language turns out to be an instrument
for transmission, and, in the light of the present theory, one might say in the

ON A THEORY OF LANGUAGE

389

first place transmission of information. The relevant consideration here is
that non-error-compounding transmission is favored by transmission of discrete signals rather than continuously differentiated signals.
Within syntax, there are several observable conditions that language has
to meet. The speakers are finite beings; hence language must be susceptible
of a finite characterization, i.e., a finite grammar. Language itself - that is,
the set of sentences - is unbounded; hence its having a finite grammar
means that all except a finite (and reasonably small) subset of its sentences
must consist of different combinations (finitely describable) of a finite set of
parts (vocabulary, and previously constructed sentences). These are what
have been ordered as the successive sentence-making entries.
Then again, language can have no external metalanguage, existing independently of the structure of language itself, in which the structure of
language could be described. Hence tl:te sentence parts, the words and previously formed sentences, have to have grossly different combinations with
each other, and positions in respect to each other, in order to distinguish
them. and to identify their relations; for this could not be done in any metalanguage that did not itself have to have some such structure. These gross
differences are the argument-demand (i.e., entry-condition) classes, and
their relative positions in the word-sequence they form. Hence also the need
for a syntactic property to express the meaning-differences among words:
this is done by the inequalities of likelihood.
Finally, it is of practical importance for discourses to be approximately as
short as possible, given the information they are carrying: this is done by the
reductions for low-information entries.
When we see this connection of the fundamental processes to the fundamental conditions oflanguage, it becomes evident that we need no appeal to
a structure existing independently oflanguage or prior to language. It is not
only a matter of there being no way of understanding or demonstrating the
existence of such an independent structure. It is simply that, when the structure of language can be shown to follow from the few fundamental processes
presented above, these processes in turn have too close a connenction to the
conditions of language to require a completely independent explanation.
The Structure of the Set of Sentences; Sublanguages

Linguistics has always characterized sentences by their composition, either
in terms of components that were not themselves sentences, or - transformationallinguistics - in terms of components that were themselves sentences.
In the present theory we find an additional structure: a structure in the set of
sentences, making it possible to characterize sentences not only by components but also in terms of the subsets and sublanguages to which they
belong. The partitions of the set of sentences (Paper 13, and MSL) make it

390

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

possible to identify ambiguous word-sequences (qua being 'different sentences') as members of more than one equivalence class. The reductionless members, one from each equivalence class, form a sublanguage with
structural and semantic properties such as have been noted above. Other
important subsets of sentences and sublanguaages can be identified.
One set of sublanguages is the metalinguistic. These have a unique hierarchical structure, of which only the briefest sketch will be given here. (a) We
can form, in more than one way, an object-language subset Lo of English,
which excludes sentences all of whose elementary operators are mentalanguage terms such as is a word, even in reduced or zeroed form. Lo has a
grammar close to but not identical with that of English. (b) We them form a
minimal set of English sentences, L 1 , sufficient to characterize all the sentences of Lo' LI has a grammar of its own, differing importantly from that
of Lo or of English, and is closed under the operations of this grammar. The
elementary arguments of L 1 , are all portions, proper or not, of discourses in
Lo; more precisely they are all the entries and entry-sequences in the discourses in Lo' The elementary operators of LI are metalinguistic terms (is a
word, is an operator, is a sentence, etc.) and words for various grammatical
relations and events, etc. (c) We can furhter form a minimal set of sentences,
L 2 , sufficient to characterize all the sentences of LI and only these. Here the
elementary arguments are, e.g., 'Lo entry', 'Lo entry-sequence' (but not the
individual words of L o),9 the elementary operators of L 1, etc. The elementary
operators of L2 are a simpler set than those of L 1 , because some of the relations that are crucial to Lo (and described in L 1 ) such as the inequalities and
their preservation, are not important in describing the sentences of L 1 • Thus
the grammar of L2 differs recognizably from that of L 1 • (d) If we now form
a set of sentences, L 3 , sufficient to characterize precisely all in the sentences
of L 2 , we find that the grammar of L3 differs slightly from that of L z . This
is chiefly because the elementary arguments in L 2 , whose classes are among
the elementary arguments of L 3 , do not present the problems that the elementary arguments of LI did for L 2 . (e) But when we reach L4 we find that
the grammar - the names of the word classes and their relations - of L4
and of all further meta languages is identical with that of L 3 , even though the
words subsumed under a word-class are in each instance shifted to bring
those of the last preceding metalanguage. Thus, there is a grammar, that of
L 1 , which suffices for the infinite regress of metalanguages.
Other sublanguages appear in specialized subject matters that deal with
explicitly restricted material, e.g., in the natural sciences. Here we find operators that occur not on all elementary arguments but only on certain ones,
while other operators occur on other elementary arguments (MSL, 152).
Although the sentences are a subset of English, their grammar is not a subset
of the grammar of English, but rather intersects it. Much in it is the same as

ON A THEORY OF LANGUAGE

391

in English, but there are features of English that never show up in the given
subject matter, and, more important, there are restrictions in the subjectmatter language that cease to hold when the sentences of the subject matter
and the other sentences of English are all described together (MSL, 153).
There are also differences that are of interest to theory: natural language,
being unspecific, cannot exclude any individual N from being a possible
argument of an elementary operator; but in a science the possibilities of
nonsense (but not of falsity) are limited, and only certain N are allowed as
arguments of certain Onn,10 and gradation of likelihoods (selection) is largely irrelevant. And, of course, the subject-matter sub languages do not contain the sentences of their own metalanguage.
NOTES
Cf. the writer's Mathematical Structures of Language, Interscience Tracts in Pure and
Applied Mathematics 21 (Wiley, New York, 1968); hereafter referred to as MSL.
6 See Henry Hiz, 'Alethei<; Theory', Philosophical Forum I (1969), 438-451; and 'On the Rules
of Consequences for a Natural Language', The Monist, LVII (1973),312-327.
7 This is not contradicted by languages that have roots which are not free words. Such roots are
merely the grammarians' construct. In the language itself the various word-forms can be derived from a distinguished word (usually the third-person present from) rather than from a
theoretical root.
8 Sublanguages have such a mechanism, in their ability to have distinct subsets of elementary
operators, each subset accepting a distinct subset of elementary arguments. However, this is
related to two conditions which do not apply to the whole language: being closed to certain
meanings (so that certain combinations that are nonsensical to the sublanguage are excluded by
its grammar); and having an external metalanguage in which these subsets are defined.
9 The individual words of L. do not figure in the sentences of L2 because there are no inequalities in respect to those words such as are preserved in any operations on the sentences of
L 1 • This decline in the importance of inequalities is characteristic of science sublanguages, as is
noted below. Much the same analysis results if we start with L o' = the whole of English, instead of with L o '
10 As an result, various problems of analysis and meaning, such as are discussed in Quine's
Word and Object (Cambridge, Mass. MIT Press, 1960), are resolvable for the sublanguage of a
science in a way that would be inadequate for the language as a whole.
5

15

GRAMMAR ON MATHEMATICAL PRINCIPLES

This paperl presents a grammatical theory which has certain mathematical
properties, and which produces the sentences of a language by means of two
simple processes, word-entry and entry-reduction, with the meaning of each
sentence being indicated directly by its construction. The reason for seeking
a mathematical control on grammatical analysis lies partly in the inherent
posibilities of such a connexion, and partly in the complex and somewhat
haphazard nature of grammar, which makes one wonder if there is not
something simpler and more principled involved. In the event, the system of
grammatical analysis which is reached here is not an alternative to descriptions of grammatical patterns, but rather a complement to them; for in
producing the sentences it locates and explicates those patterns as resultants
of the two processes, but without cataloguing or arranging them.
The essential problem was to find one or more relations (or operations) on
the set of sentences in respect to which that set - or, as it turned out, an
extension of that set - is closed. To meet this problem we will establish
certain overt relations among English sentences, which can then be shown to
hold also in less noticeable situations. The result will be the set of grammatically possible sentences; and it is this set which will be seen to have the
desired mathematical properties.
I. REDUCTION

First, we note certain relations among subsets of sentences, where one can
say that a word has been reduced in its phonemic shape. A simple case is that
of pronouns: we can save pronouns from being something unique in grammar, if we describe pronominalization not as replacement of a noun by a
pronoun, but as reduction of a repeated noun to a short phonemic sequence
- that which is called 'pronoun'. The reason pronouns are thought of as
separate words is that there is a systemic degeneracy: different words, when
repeated, are reduced to the same phonemic sequence. Similarly, repeated
words can be reduced to zero ('zeroed'), as in Bach wrote cantatas and
Mozart operas from Bach wrote cantatas and Mozart wrote operas, and in I
asked to be last from I asked that I be last. Here too different words are
reduced to the same zero. 'Pronoun' and 'zero' may therefore be used as
verbs, like 'reduce'.
Journal of LinguiSTics (1978) 1-20.

GRAMMAR ON MATHEMATICAL PRINCIPLES

393

In certain sentence-positions, indefinite nouns such as things, people,
someone are zero able. We can take We opposed building the monument, from
We opposed people's bUilding the monument, and He readfor his examinations
from He read things (or: the relevant things) for his examinations. Assuming
here the existence and then zeroing of things is preferable to saying that read
is intransitive as well as transitive; for read is intransitive only in contexts
in which an object of it can be said to have been zeroed.
There are also cases where it is clear that a particular word (or one of its
synonyms) is the indicated word in the given environment, and has been
zeroed. Thus the object of expect is normally a sentence: I expect that John
will be late, I expect John to leave, or to come, etc. When we see I expect John,
then rather than say that expect can also have noun as object, we say that to
be here, or to come, has been zeroed in the sentential object of expect. This,
not only because the meaning of I expect John is thereby obtained, but also
beca~se nouns can be objects of expect precisely to the extent that they can
be subjects of be here, come: We no more say *1 expect time, *1 expect the
universe, than we say *Time is here, *The universe comes.
Also, when we compare my friend, the ambassador, with my friend, who is
the ambassador, and this book here with this book which is here, and a correct
copy with a copy which is correct, we can say that which is, who is is zeroed,
with required shifting of adjectival words to before the noun.
A more complicated case of zeroing of particular words is seen in the
compound stress. All compound words, N-X, aside from a few petrified
cases, can be obtained from XP' N, where the X is a noun or an adjective'
(including derived ones) and P' represents certain prepositions (mostly for,
oj) and certain verbs or adjectives depending on the pair X, N (e.g. like,
special to). Thus snow-shoes +-- shoes for snow, repeated book-burnings +-repeated burnings of books, slate-grey wall +-- wall grey like slate +-- wall
which is grey like slate. Many X, N pairs permit the zeroing of a particular
verb or preposition which is special to them: The milkman is late +-- The man
who brings the milk is late; The milk-punch is strong +-- The punch containing milk is strong and presumably not from The punch coloured like milk is
strong.
Another kind of zeroing is that of I ask, I request. To obtain a common
derivation for all interrogatives, both yes-no and wh-questions, it is best to
take Are you coming? not from You're coming but from I ask operating
on You are coming, yielding I ask whether you are coming or not. Then Who
is coming? would come from I ask on the pair One is coming, Another is
coming, yielding I ask whether one is coming or another is coming, which by
regular and-or zeroing reduces to I ask whether one or another is coming,
which reduces by wh-pronouning to I ask who is coming. In both forms of
the questioning statements there is then an optional change which places a

394

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

question intonation on the object of ask, dropping the whether and permuting the free subject with the following verb-word. This yields I ask: Are you
cominl(, or not?, I ask: Who is cominl(?, and further Are you coming?, I ask
and Who is coming?, I ask. This whole development occurs with all verbs
whose object is whether. . . or. . . (but not if there is a zeroed choice or the
like as in I know whether he is coming or not, which there is reason to derive
from I know the choice as to whether he is coming or not). E.g., He could not
decide whether she was there or not +- He could not decide: Was she there, or
not? The connexion between question-intonation and this disjunction is supported by the fact that verbs lacking one lack the other: e.g. I doubt whether
he is there, but *1 doubt whether he is there or not and *1 doubt: Is he there?
The relevance of this derivation to our present purposes is in showing that
Are you coming?, Who is coming?, is obtained by zeroing of the main verb
(with its subject) whose object the question had been, namely I ask.
A similar analysis yields Please come! from I request of you: Please come!
from I request of you that you please come.
There are also examples of reduction of particular words not to zero but
to affixes. Thus, the relation of quietly to in a quiet manner, and the relation
of considerably to to a considerable degree, would be considered merely one
of paraphrase were it not that they are historically connected. The-ly is a
reduction of lic 'body, form' plus indirect case-ending when that was in a
compound with quiet, considerable, etc. But lie plus case-ending must also
have occured as a free word, not in compound; and there it was replaced by
in a manner, to a degree, etc. Hence quietly has today the status of a reduced
variant of in a quiet manner. Given this understanding, we must go further
and say that adverbs of fact, such as truly, also had some preposition-noun
form, such as as a true matter, which is not merely their paraphrase but their
unreduced variant; for the free-word form of -ly with true must have been
able to exist and must have been in effect replaced by some word which can
stand freely today in this position.
A similar situation of affix-reduction and suppletion is seen in-hood. This
is historically reduced from the compound position of -had 'state, condition', which in free-word position has been replaced by such words as
state. Whereas book-burning is clearly from burning of books, childhood is
less obviously from the state of being a child; but it is that, not merely by
paraphrase, but by historical reduction in the suffix (and compound) position and suppletion is the free-word position. This derivation explains how
the suffix can carry its own modifiers. Thus His early childhood was unhappy
is from His early state C?f being a child was unhappy, with early modifying
state, i.e., the eventual suffix -hood.

GRAMMAR ON MA THEMA TICAL PRINCIPLES

395

2. AMOUNT OF INFORMATION

The reductions have a common property, that all of them take place on
words which is one way or another contributed little or no information to
their sentence. This is the case for repeated words. Thus, since repetional
zeroing under and takes place only for words which repeat a word in corresponding position, having zero between Mozart and operas gives no less
information than having wrote. Similarly for pronouns, except for degeneracy in respect to which is the noun that is the antecedent. The indefinite
nouns contribute no information. All that things tells us after read is that
there is something which is being read, which we obtain anyhow if we take
He read as a transitive with zeroed indefinite object, rather than as an intransitive. The which is, who is are by far the most likely words in their position,
hence the least information-bearing: the only other words there, which are
not zeroed, would be which becomes or the like. The be here under expect,
and the various verbs zeroed for the compound, are the most expectable,
given their neighbours, and are inferrable from the zeroing, and even recoverable. And the prepositions zeroed for the compound are the general
ones for that relation, and very common, and hence contribute little information.
A different and interesting kind of informationaless ness is seen in the case
of I ask, I request. While the information of the word ask is contained in the
question-intonation which is imposed on its object, the subject and tense of
ask do contribute extra information. However, there is one subject and tense
which can be considered to contribute no information, and this happens in
the performative case. For a person to say I ask: Are you coming? is the same
as for him to say Are you coming?, because for the speaker to make the
statement is for the question to be asked. Hence I ask is zeroable. That
indeed it is I ask and not I asked, He asks, etc., which is zeroed here is clear
not only from the meaning of the question form but also from its textual
environment.
There are many other examples of reduction taking place where amount
of information is low. For example, a sentence which is the object ('complement') of a verb (I promised John that I would get the book) may zero its
subject or object if they are the same as the subject of the main verb (I
promised John to get the book). Which of these positions is the one that
admits zeroing depends on the main verb, in a s~emingly arbitrary way. But
there is reason to the choice of position for zeroing. Thus, there is little referential zeroing under observe or report: I observed my sluring of the vowels, I
reported his seeing me. Under prefer, admit, promise, the subject is zeroed if it
is the same as the main subject: I prefer to phone John, I admit phonin!(
John, I promised John to phone him. Under order or beg, the subject is zeroed

396

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

if it is the same as the first object of the main verb: I ordered John to phone
them, I begged John to phone me. Under deserve, suffer, undergo, the object is
zeroed if it is the same as the main subject: John deserves our support, John
suffered their attacks. Under defend, the object is zeroed if it is the same as
the first object of the main verb: I defend him from their attack.
Each one of these verb sets has a property common to its members. That
property is not their having a common meaning: it is hard to say what
meaning is common to prefer and promise but not to beg or deserve. Rather,
it is the likelihood that the subject, or object, under that verb be the same as
the subject, or object, of the verb itself. It is reasonable to expect that the
object under they undergo, they deserve should be the same they (i.e. same as
the main subject), or that the subject under they admit, they promise should
be the same they, and so on. But such higher likelihood means that when the
main subject, or object, indeed reappears in the stated other position it
contributes less information there than a different word would; and it is this
low-information case that is zeroed.
A different example is seen in the reciprocal verbs. These verbs present
difficulties for grammar, not least in that require and in their subject - a
rather irregular situation. They can be obtained simply if we derive, say,
John and Mary met from John and Mary met each other pronouned from
John met Mary and Mary met John (which is why we do not normally have
*John and his doom met, *John and the brook met from John met his doom,
John kept descending until he met the brook). Now, the pronouning to each
other can take place with any verb: John and Mary saw each other from John
saw Mary and Mary saw John. But the zeroing of each other takes place only
in verbs where given Nt VNz it is most likely that also N z VNt , so that little or
no information is given there by an occurrence of and N z VNt , which is
pronouned by the each other, which can then be zeroed.
Whereas high likelihood favours reduction, low likelihood can block a
reduction which would otherwise take place. Thus He farms extensively has
two meanings, one when reduced from to an extensive degree, and the other
when reduced from in an extensive manner (as against intensive farming).
But He writes extensively on this subject is only to an extensive degree. It is
not that one cannot say He writes in an extensive manner, but rather that
manner is not common for the pair write, extensive and therefore is not
reduced there to -ly, except contrastively.

3. INSERTION OF INDEFINITE NOUNS
Aside from the reductions, we must note another overt relation among
sentences. This involves the extra occurrence of indefinite nouns such as
that, something. If we consider such sentences as

GRAMMAR ON MATHEMATICAL PRINCIPLES

397

(1) What fell is a dictionary
(2) The dictionary is what fell
(3) A dictionary is what I need,
we seem to have in (2) a fixed word-sequence is what inserted into a sentence;
from (2) one kind of exceptional permutation yields (I) and another yields
(3). But English has also
(4) That which fell is a dictionary.
(5) The dictionary is that which fell.
(6) A dictionary is that which I need.
The relative clauses here show that (4)-(6) are derived from
(7) That is a dictionary; that fell
(8) The dictionary is that; that fell
(9) A dictionary is that; I need that,
just like A dictionary is the thing which fell +- A dictionary is a thing; the
thingfell, and The book whichfell is a dictionary +- The book is a dictionary;
the book fell. Although (7)-(9) are stylistically uncomfortable, the sentences
(4)-(6) imply the existence of (7)-(9) in the grammar, for there is no other
efficient way of describing (4)-(6), and all other that which sentences. In turn,
all sentences in the set of (1)-(3) are obtained from (4)-(6) sentences by a
reduction of that which -+ what. The permutations which would have been
needed for (1), (3) are thus not needed; they are inherent in the different
orders available in (7)-(9).
4. OTHER SHAPE CHANGES

There are very few other changes of shape in English sentences. Almost all
permutations arise from a leftward shifting of a secondary sentence into its
primary. This happens especially if a noun or noun-like sequence in the
second is pronounced by wh as being a repetition of one in the first, thus
creating a relative clause: My friend left; I had told you about him goes both
to My friend - I had told you about him - left and to My friend left, whom I
had told you about -+ My friend, whom I had told you about, left. In the
relative clause, which is, who is (and in some situations which, whom) are
zeroable; certain residues then shift further to before the antecedent: The
sun, which is bright, shone-+ The bright sun shone.

398

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

5. EXTENSION BEYOND THE ATTESTED SENTENCES
We have seen certain kinds of reductions, mostly to zero, taking place on
material that contributes little information to its sentence; and we have seen,
in the is what sentences, the insertion of indefinite nouns in a way that affects
the nuance of the sentence. We will now see that these reductions and insertions, in the same conditions, can be used to derive the remaining sentences of English from sentence-like formations (to be marked with t) that
go beyond what is normally said in English, and which will be characterized
below as grammatically possible rather than actual. These grammatically
possible sentences are marginal to English grammar, rather than external to
it, as noted in § 6 below. Their importance lies in this, that if we include them
as descriptive (not always historical) sources of the remaining English sentences, then the reductions and insertions described above turn out to suffice
for deriving all English sentences from a subset of sentences (including daggered ones) having very simple structure.
A few major cases are the following:
Adverbs and subordinate conjunctions are obtained via zeroed which is on
a sentence. They can be derived from predicates on the sentence, but not
directly: they are predicates on a secondary repetition of the sentence, which
has formed a relative clause. He addressed them quietly and He quietly addressed them are both from t He addressed them, which was in a quiet manner
(or: quietly) +-- He addressed them; his addressing them was in a quiet manner.
Simillarly, He left because they phoned and Because they phoned, he left are
both from He left, which was because they phoned +-- He left; his leaving was
because they phoned. The various permutations of adverbs and subordinate
clauses are precisely those permitted by zeroing of which is. The derivation
via two sentences with semicolon also explains why both the verb and the
adverb are each asserted in He spoke qUietly. And it explains why there is no
* He falsely left, * He left improbably, although one can say That he left is
false, That he left is improbable, and of course, He truly left, He left probably.
The reason is that the source would be * He left; that he left isfalse and * He
left; that he left is improbable, and it is the conjunction of the two which is
rejected in each case.
English, like other languages, has various words of peculiar and apparently multiple syntactic statuses. It turns out that for each such word, its
various uses can be obtained from a single source, by means of 'expectableword' zeroing such as has been seen above. Consider, for example, only,
except, but. Because of their concessive meaning, a favoured (expectable)
first sentence under them is one that contains everyone else (anyone else) and
is otherwise the negation of the second sentence under them. Thus, for but:
Mary cooked, but John was late is possible, while Mary cooked, but John

GRAMMAR ON MA THEMA TICAL PRINCIPLES

399

didn't (cook) is more comfortable, and the distinguished case is seen in
Everyone else cooked, but Mary did not (cook). Now we first consider the
zeroings under only. We seem to have two syntactic statuses for only: (I) I
spoke, only John wouldn't listen (with conjunctional only) and (2) Only John
wouldn't listen. If we start, in the conjunctional type (1), with Everyone
listened, only John wouldn't listen, the first sentence is the favoured one and
zero able, yielding Only John wouldn't listen, which is of type (2) above. The
meaning of only in type (2) is precisely the sum of that in type (1) plus the
expectable sentence Everyone (else) listened. In (2) it seems as though only
carries this as a covert or implicit meaning, but actually this is merely the
meaning of the zeroed sentence. As to how it is that the conjunction and can
occur before the conjunction only: if we start with We argued and everyone
listened only John did not listen we obtain We argued and only John did not
listen.
As to except: it is an ordinary conjunction in John invited her, except that
she couldn't come. In John agreed, except Mary did not agree, regular zeroing yields John agreed, exept not Mary. In the favoured everyone + not case,
as above, with not being said in the second sentence, the everyone-sentence is
not zeroable, but the not is: from Everyone (else) agreed, except Mary did not
agree we have, by repeated-word zeroing, Everyone agreed, except not Mary,
and by expectable-word zeroing on not, Everyone agreed except Mary. It is in
this way that the sentencte with not comes out as a paraphrase of the one
without not. Similarly for but: First, John invited her but she couldn't come.
From Everyone (else) agreed but Mary did not agree we obtain Everyone, but
not Mary, agreed and Everyone but Mary agreed with the same expectableword zeroing of not. However, but permits also the expectable-sentence
zeroing seen under only. Hence Everyone (else) agreed, but Mary did not
agree reduces to the rather rare But Mary did not agree with stressed but in
the sense of only. It is in this way that we reach the paraphrase between
There isn't but one glass left and There is but one glass left, both from There
isn't anything (else) left, but there is one glass left, with and without zeroing
of not. In this way too the apparently different uses of but as conjunction
and as synonym of only are obtained from the same source.
Another case of zeroing which goes beyond the obvious is seen when we
assume that any assertional sentence, including such as become components
of larger ones, have a zeroed I say, in a way comparable to the zeroing of I
ask, I request. E.g. I say that he is here -+ I say: He is here. -+ He is here, I
say. -+ He is here. There are many indications that any sentence can carry a
zeroable I say: e.g. interpellations as in He is uncertain, not to say confused,
where the subject of say is presumably I, zeroed from the first I say in t I say
that he is uncertain, if it is not for me to say that he is corifused. A simpler
situation is He's home, because his car is in the garage where because makes

400

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

sense only if I say was present: I say he's home because his car is in the garage.
Various problems, such as those in direct and indirect discourse, are simplified by this eminently possible, if uncustomary, analysis.
A related analysis can apply to the tenses. Tenses are peculiar in that their
normal definition is meta linguistic, refering to the time of the speaking of the
sentence. However, there is also evidence that tense indicates the time-order
between verbs in the sentence - more clearly in some other languages than in
English. It is possible to obtain these and various other properties of English
tenses by starting with, for example:

t John expects Mary's coming; Mary's coming is after John's expecting it.
~ t John expects Mary's coming, which is after John's expecting it.
Here John's expecting it is zeroable, as being a repetition:
~ John expects Mary's coming, after.

Here we can posit that after imposes will on Mary's coming, much as ask
imposes question intonation on its object-sentence (in I ask: Are you coming?), Then we obtain
John expects that Mary will come.
The tense on the main verb comes similarly from its time-order to the I say
on it:

t I say that John expects that Mary will come; John's expecting that Mary
will come is before my saying it.
~ t I say that John expects that Mary will come, before my saying it.
~ I say that John expected that Mary would come.
~ I say: John expected that Mary would come.
~ John expected that that Mary would come.
Note that the -ed on expect also attaches to verbs which had been previously
tensed in respect to expect: will come to would come. This is a roundabout
way of obtaining tense; but, as with the pronouns, it saves tense from being
sui generis in grammar, by deriving it from ordinary constructions by means
of known reductions.
Like reductions, the insertion of indefinite nouns, too, explains difficult
grammatical constructions. For example, there is"the difference between nonrestrictive (or 'descriptive') relative clauses, as in

GRAMMAR ON MA THEMA TICAL PRINCIPLES

401

A man, whom I know, phoned
and the comma-less restrictive
A man whom I know phoned;
in the restrictive form, phoning is asserted about someone identified as a
man I know. The form and special meaning of the restrictive can be readily
obtained if we start with

t Someone phoned; the same someone is a man; I know the man.
-+ Someone phoned; the same someone is a man, whom I know.
-+ Someone, who is a man whom I know, phoned.

where the earlier relative clause loses its comma when compressed into a
further relative clause. Then, zeroing the indefinite someone and the following who is, we reach
A man whom I know phoned.
The special restrictive meaning comes from the fact that phoned does not
enter into a grammatical construction with man until after man had received
the modifer whom I know. I contrast, the non-restrictive case comes from
A man phoned; I know the man
-+ A man phoned, whom I know
-+ A man, whom I know, phoned,
where phoning is asserted of the man independently of my knowing him.
As a final example of a transformation, consider the passive, which was
the first to have been established. It is clear that the passive is not simply an
independent rearrangement and form-change of the active, since all its ingredients are otherwise known in the grammar, in closely related uses. The
by plus subject occurs in nominalizations: The chopping of trees by settlers
denuded the forest. The -en(-ed occurs as an affix having approximately the
same semantic and descriptive (though not historical) relation to some such
completive word as state, as does -hood in the childhood example. This is seen
in the very early -ed on nouns (moneyed, hard-headed), which descriptively
can be considered to be the same morpheme as -en(-ed, and which means
'state' as in in the state ofhaving money, etc. It is also seen in the development
of the perfect, whose early stage was, e.g., J have the book closed, i.e. t J have
the book in the state ofmy closing of it; note that J have closed the book means

402

STRUCTUR'AL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

that it is I who closed it, and lacks passive connotation, so that the source is
not t I have the book in closed state, In a parallel way we have the passive:
The book wasfound by John from t The book was in the state ofthefinding of
the book by John, with of the book zeroed as repetition, This derivation is
equally hospitable to agent-less passives such as A kitten is born with its eyes
closed (although nobody closes them) from t A kitten is born in the state of
its eyes' closing (or: of the closing of its eyes), Similarly for intransitives,
where the resultants are only statives and not passive at all: as in We are
agreed from t We are in the state of our agreeing; The sun is risen from t The
sun is in the state of its rising, The completive aspect of the passive thus does
not have to be separately explained. It arises from the character of the en/-ed
(and of its free-word variant state); and the extension of the passive to the
non-completive, as in It is being built is quite recent. The subject of the
passive is thus not a permuted object of the verb; rather, it is the subject of is
in a state, in reference to which the object of the verb is zeroed. This analysis
does not require that state be a free-word source for -en/-ed, but only that
-en/-ed be an operator like in a state (9 below). Of course, non-periphrastic
passives, in some other languages, would be analysed differently.
6. THE ST A TUS OF THE DAGGERED FORMS

The daggered sentences have the property that they differ from attested
sentences of the language only by the same listable changes (made in the
same conditions) as hold among attested sentences. Furthermore they consist of English words appearing in positions which those words have in the
attested sentences of English. No clear line can be drawn between them and
the norma.l sentences; indeed, already the sources of the that which is sentences could have been daggered, even though they are inescapable as being
the relevant sources there. Note also that the set of attested sentences is not
well defined. Many sentences are marginal, or used by some speakers or
writers and not others. Some of the daggered sentences are grating to the ear
without being excludable from the grammar in any principled way.
The relation of the daggered sentences to their normal resultants is not
always historical. True, -hood is the reduced compound form of a word
replaced by state, and thus suppletive to it. But we cannot say this of -en/-ed.
Nevertheless, descriptively, the detailed conditions and meanings in which
-en/-ed occurs are as though it were reduced from some such word as state.
Or rather, -en/-ed retains, in its suffix position, properties that belong to a
word such as state. Just as we saw in early childhood the word early as a
modifier on -hood, so in e.g. the freshly isolated heart, the word freshly,
which is not an adverb on to isolate, appears as adverb on the -en/-ed: the
heart freshly in the state of the isolating of it.

GRAMMAR ON MATHEMA TICAL PRINCIPLES

403

We therefore take these daggered sentences as constituting, together with
the normal sentences, an extended set of grammatically possible sentences.
7. THE ENTR Y AND REDUCTION SYSTEM
The extended set of grammatically possible sentences has mathematical and
linguistic properties. If we form in that set a subset I consisting of only the
unreduced sentences, whether daggered or not, we find that they have a
transparent structure, describable as follows:
In the sentences of I we define a relation Y > X (Y is later than X; X is
prior to V), where X, Yare sets of simple (generally affix less ) words entering
the sentence. The relation holds for just those cases where a word Y of set Y
is present in I-sentences only provided that some word X of set X is present
there: we say that set Y requires X. Thus an I -sentence containing probable
must also contain a word of the set (verbs, etc.) which includes come, fall,
large (His coming is probably, but not * He is probably); every I-sentence
containing fall must contain a word of the set of John, rock, etc., but not
necessarily a word of the set of come, probably, etc. (e.g. John fell, which
contains no other verb). In the second case, we could say that rock requires
fall, rather than fall requires rock; butfall is morphologically and positionally similar to probable and to the other words which have non-null requirements, whereas rock is not.)
The entry relation is a partial order: If a word Y > X, Z, it may be that X
> Z, or Z > Y, or neither. This last case we see in John wears hats, where
wears> John, hats, but John ::j> hats, and hats ::j> John. If, for word-occurrences Y, X, A in an I-sentence, Y > X, and there is no A such that Y > A
> X, we say that Y in the sentence is the operator, or next later entry, on X,
and X is an argument, or immediately prior entry, of Y; also that X was free
for Y. In the linear form of the sentence, the operator appears immediately
after the first of its arguments, as in John wears hats; if we accept some
suffixes as operators, these appear after their second argument: John was
seen by Mary the arguments of -en/-ed are John, see, and those of see are
Mary, John.
It is found that each word is associated with particular ordered word sets,
members of which must be its immediately prior entries; we call these sets
the argument requirement (or requirement) for that word: e.g. the requirement for wear is two words of the John, hats class. To avoid infinite regress
or circularity, there must be some words whose requirement is null (called
primitive arguments, N), some whose requirement consists only of primitive
arguments (these are called elementary operators), and some whose requirements include operators (these are the non-elementary operators). Operators are written with subscripts to indicate their ordered arguments: elem-

404

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

entary operators include On (e.g. sleep in John slept), 0nn (e.g. wear); nonelementary operators include On (e.g. continue, probable in John's playing
continued, That Juhn is late is probable), 0no (e.g. cause in John's phoning
caused my return). 0nno (e.g. tell in I told John that she left), 0noo (e.g. attribute
in I attribute her return to John's phoning). It is found that the only wordclasses needed for arguments are Nand 0: i.e. an argument of a word is
either null, or it is any primitive argument, or it is any operator of whatever
kind. For example, there is no verb whose object must be an elementary
operator such as sleep and not a non-elementary one such as know: Ifwe can
say I think that he slept, we can say I think that he knows that se came.
Every operator forms with its arguments an I-sentence, and appears there
after the first one of its arguments, as in John wears hats. Every I-sentence is
formed out of N and operators belonging to some ten subsets - the entryclasses On' nn'
etc. - with no other factors entering into its construction.
There are few or no grammatical restrictions on the members of an argument set, aside from graduated unlikelihood due to nonsensicality. Thus if
wear requires two N, it is not necessary for the first to be animate and the
second clothing. If we consider metaphor, fairy-tales, and arrant nonsense,
there is no primitive argument N which can be absolutely excluded grammatically from either argument-position.
The reductions, if they are made, are made on (or in respect to) words
entering a sentence at the moment at which they enter. They cannot normally be made after further entries have come in. This fact is the source of the
nesting of grammatical constructions, e.g. the fact that later adverbs are
farther from the verb than earlier ones (except for intrusion with commas).
Also, the determination of whether a word is contributing low information,
and is thus reducible, can be made on the basis of the relation of the word to
its prior (in most cases immediately prior) or next later entries. If come is
zeroable under expect, and manner rejects reduction to -Iy when between
write and extensive, it is all on the basis of their likelihoods to their next
entries - to expect, and write, extensive - without regard to the rest of the
sentence.
These conditions on entry and reduction suffice as grammatical processes.
The grammatical patterns that emerge for each language are due to the
specific types of entry-classes and reductions, and to the similarities of physical shape and of domain among the various reductions. Given a list of the
words in each entry class, N, On etc., and a list of the specific reductions with
the subdomains to which they apply, these processes produce the actual
sentences 'of the language.

° °

0,

GRAMMAR ON MA THEMA TICAL PRINCIPLES

405

8. MA THEMA TICAL PROPER TIES

The set of grammatically possible sentences is closed under the entry-order
relation, making it amenable to mathematical investigation. Furthermore,
the objects which participate in the entry order are defined solely in terms of
that order: a word is defined as having entry requirements of N or 0 where
N, 0 are defined by their having either null or non-null entry requirement;
this makes the set formed by the entry-order relation a mathematical object.
The further grammatical events, mainly the reductions and the insertions of
indefinites, are defined on likelihood and other relations among the participants in the entry-order relation.
The entities in the set which is closed with respect to this entry-order
relation are sentential word-sequences. But they could be anything else, and
if these other things had the same estimated likelihoods of entry that the
words do, then the new entries would constitute under the entry-order relation a set isomorphic to the set of sentences, as indeed we have in writing
vis-a-vis speech. In contrast, concatenation as an operation in the set of all
word-sequences, or manipulation of word-position or the like without regard
to entry status, does not distinguish sentences from non-sentences without a
large ad hoc apparatus of grammatical conditions.
The grammatical analysis of a sentence consists in finding what ordered
entries and reductions, the occurrence-conditions for each being satisfied by
its precursor, yield the sentence; it constitues a decomposition of the sentence into a canonical form.
Abstractly, therefore, we are dealing here not with words defined as
having certain meanings and certain morphological structures, and not with
a body of rules stated on particular words or combinations, but with the set
of grammatically possible sentences as a mathematical object. As a result of
all this, it is possible to state various relations among the entities, and the
subsets, in the set of sentences. And since the interpretation of the mathematical object is a real thing, language, the subsets and relations have real
interpretations too. Only a brief sketch of some subsidiary relations can be
given here.
We take the set S of grammatically possible sentences with homonymous
(ambiguous) sentences, which are reduced from different sources, being
taken as different sentences. In S, each operator which has precisely one
operator in its argument-requirements (called unary) maps the set S into
itself, i.e. onto the subset whose latest operator is that unary. Each binary
operator, which has two operators in its argument-requirement, maps S x S
into S. Each reduction maps a subset of S (having a particular latest or
penultimate entry) onto a subset (having that reduction). All of these are
thus transformations and partial transformations of the set S, and it is for
this reason that these intersentence relations were called transformations.

406

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

In S, the subset I of sentences containing no reduction is closed with
respect to the entry-order relation, and can be called a sublanguage. In n
successive reductions in a sentence, the domain of the mth (m :::;; n) cannot be
larger than that of the m-lth (since the mth is defined on the resultant of the
m-l th); hence while it may be that there are some unreduced sentences which
have no reduced one as image, there are no reduced sentences that lack an
inverse image in the sublanguage. This, plus the fact that the reductions do
not alter the information in the sentence, means that all the information in
the reduced sentences is present in their inverse images, i.e. in the sublanguage. Hence the set S contains a sublanguage, I whose sentences have
the transparent entry-order construction, unrestricted by reductions, and
contain all the information in the sentences of the language.
Various algebraic structures can be defined in S. Equivalence relations
can be defined in S, yielding various partitions of the set. The set S is a
semigroup under and as binary composition. If we take two sentences in it to
be in the same equivalence class Ei when they contain the same ordered
unary operators and reductions, then and provides a binary composition in
the set E of equivalence classes, with (EA and EB) = (EA and B)' The elementary sentences of the language are reachable via the kernel of the natural
mapping of S onto its quotient set E; it is for this reason that they were
called kernel-sentences. Another partition puts into one equivalence class all
sentences having the same partially ordered entries: all sentences in an
equivalence class are then paraphrases, and one is unreduced, i.e. a member
of the informational sublanguage above.
Defining the reductions on entries rather than on sentences make possible
a finitary grammar: a finite set of elements and operations, and finite
domains (prior entries, not whole sentences) for these.
9. PROPERTIES OF LANGUAGE

This system of grammar can be presented as a set of formation and transformation rules on an alphabet consisting of Nand O. Given which words
are in each reduction, this system provides not merely the grammar of sentence structures but the grammar of actual sentences - the indication of
which word-sequences are sentences, although one would still need information about likelihoods and about which reductions are common. In general,
the domains of the restricted reductions require listing, at least for borderline cases, even though they are not arbitrary and must be related to extrahigh likelihood (yielding zeroing), extra-low likelihood (semantic rejection
of a combination), and the like. Analogic and other processes on the resultants of entry-and-reduction may lead to the spread of certain constructions
and grammatical patterns.

GRAMMAR ON MATHEMATICAL PRINCIPLES

407

The theory tells what can be found in a sentence and where it can be
found: reductions apart, every sentence must contain at least one primitive
argument N, and it must contain as many N-argument positions under its
operators as it contains N (before reduction). And for every operator or
operator-pair in it, it may contain an operator with one 0 or two 0 respectively as arguments. Since the position of each operator is immediately after
the first of its ordered arguments, and since each reduction leaves a trace (as
follows from the recoverability of zeroed words), with the main permutation
being just the secondary-sentence shift, the possible locations of the entries
and their possible physical shapes are known. An effective decision procedure can be formulated for analysing every sentence into ordered reductions and entries. There are, of course, considerable complexities due to
degeneracies of reduction, many of which are only local and can be resolved
by reference to other entities in the sentence.
The sentence analysis presented here reveals the nature of grammatical
transformations. (1) Some transformations are simpy reductions, as in He
reads by zeroing of the indefinite appropriate object in He reads things; or a
succession of reductions as in His childhood lI'as happy from For one to be
happy is a state; his being a child l1'as that state. (2) Other grammatical
transformations are reduced - or as though reduced - from added entries
which had very general meanings, as in the passive -en, where The trees are in
a state of the choppping of the trees by settlers first zeroes of the trees, then
reduces in a state of the chopping to chopped, so that it may seem that the
object of chop has moved to subject position while chop has somehow changed to is chopped. (3) Yet other transformations are the results of distributing the words of a sentence through two sentences, filling in the remaining
positions with non-specifying words (e.g. demonstrative pronouns). The
non-specifying words are then reduced or zeroed, but theire presence leaves
a nuance on the sentence, as in What fell is the book, or in the restrictive
relative clause. What is common to all of these is th;tt the words of the
'source' sentence appear in the same or equivalent grammatical relations in
the transform, and that the change can be made in all or many sentences of
the source form. The reason for this is that the added words in the expanded
source forms are of such general meaning (state, that, something) that they
do not affect the word likelihoods (selections), and contribute only a nuance
of meaning, and that they therefore invite reduction to affixes or the like
which can then be considered 'constants' of the transformation. And indeed
the transformations which are pure reduction (1) are pure paraphrases. The
others (2, 3) have a difference in nuance, and this difference is visibly produced in the source form, by state, that, etc. in their given positions, and is
thereafter paraphrastically preserved in the reduction. It is thus seen that
transformations are not a set of word-manipulations coming full-blown, and

408

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

not a grammatical process at all, but an effect. They are the effect of reductions and of broad-selection entries. The only grammatical transformations
which are found in a language are those that can be reached by such entries
and by the known reductions.
The method of analysing a sentence A is to look for a source which (1)
is made out of words that have entered the source solely on entry-order
grounds, and (2) is reducible to A by attested reductions in attested conditions. 'Solely' means that any morphological structure the word may have
is not used additionally to its entry-order in accounting for the position of
the word. Indeed, we may accept that certain operators are affixes (e.g. -en/ed) entering into affixal position upon their second argument.
The different elements of language structure in terms of the present theory
fit the different universalities of linguistic features. The system of argumentrequirements and of differences in relative likelihood (selection) for words in
a single entry class seem to be universal, although some languages, for example, have few primitive arguments (concrete nouns and demonstrative
pronouns). The main types of reduction seem to be found everywhere referential zeroing and pronouning, and some kinds of 'expectable' zeroing.
Indeed, the intertranslatability of language relates in large part to the similarity of entry-structures and of the main reduction types, with 0nn operators in one language being translated largely by 0nn operators in the other,
and so on. The specific reductions are more nearly language-specific, and in
several cases the most special and difficult-to-analyse transformations are
peculiar to the one language in which they are found.
The special grammatical patterns of each language or family of languages
arise largely from characteristics of the reductions: either from special
shapes (such as the compound-word stress), or from similarities in shapes
(such as the similarity of noun-modifiers to the subject and object of a
nominalized sentence), or from having similar domains for various reductions (this creates such grammatical categories as nouns), or from complementary domains (which create conjugations and the like) - and finally
from the frequency of use of some reductions (as in the auxiliaries). But
these patterns may be affected also by ana logic extensions of sentence features, by systematic borrowing, etc.
Many of the source forms reached in this analysis reconstruct known or
possible historical sources. There are cases of a word moving to a new
grammatical status, replacing its previous occupant, as in will becoming a
future tense, and in the compound (periphrastic) tenses of various European
languages. But many other extensions and specializations of use of a word
do not get as far away from their earlier uses. They may differ locally, as in
the case of the auxialiaries, but in their farther environment or in their
complementary words (variants) they may still belong to their class of

GRAMMAR ON MATHEMATICAL PRINCIPLES

409

origin: can can still be considered a variant of a tensed 0 no' And the development of really new grammatical relations is rare and slow indeed. The status
of modifier may seem to promise such a development; but there are many
transformational connexions which keep the set of all modifiers closely tied
to being an entry-and-reduction resultant, namely to being residues of a
secondary sentence one of whose arguments is the same as one of those in
the primary sentence.
There are, however, other situations which exhibit not so much the tenacity of history as the inherent limitations of what language can or cannot
express. Thus morphology may seem to present a degree of freedom independent of syntax, one which would make morphology-rich languages
able to say things that morphology-less languages cannot. This turns out not
to be the case (witness their intertranslatability, for one thing). The affixes
are equivalent to reductions of operators, reaching their affix status by established reductions. This may be due to the fact that many of them were
inde.ed such operators. For the others, granted that they developed outside
syntax, they were domesticated, upon entering a sentence, by the entry relation which creates syntax. Whatever can be expressed with the aid of
morphology can be expressed (given the availability of the words). without
morphology, by operator-argument relations among simple words, as
though the affixes were reductions of such words.
Since the entry-structure of language is so simple, the bulk of what is
called grammar is created by the reductions. But the reductions do not alter
the entry-content of sentences. In all cases, allowing for degeneracies, when
an entry has been zeroed, its presence can be reconstructed from the structure of the sentence in its post-zeroing form, so that we do not even have to
say that the word has been dropped but only that is phonemic shape has
been changed to zero. If the zeroing is referential we know (up to ambiguity)
from the antecedent which word has been zeroed. If the zeroing is of a nonspecific or of an expectable word, its meaning-contribution to the sentence
was small and can be found in the new grammatical relation that results (e.g.
the verb-less milkman, the object-less He reads). This means also that if a
sentence contains covert meanings, not explicitly contained in any of its
words, these are due to zeroed words in the source form.
The result of this is that the meaning of each entry, and the meaning of its
operator and argument relation to prior and next entries, is preserved in the
sentence as it grows with new entries and as it is transformed. A sentence is a
particular ordering of entries, and its meaning, the meaning of the ordering
of the entries, is that ordering of the meaning of the entries. In making a
syntactic analysis we therefore obtain the meaning of the sentence directly in
terms of its entering words; and the components of the syntax are the components of the meaning. The present method enables us to reconstruct a

410

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMA TIONAL LINGUISTICS

sentence in such a way that no component says anything which is not said in
the final sentence. Thus No man came is derived not from A man came; the
man is none but from I deny that a man came. And Frozenfood lasts long is
taken not from Foods lasts long; that food is frozen but from Something last
long; that something is food; that food is frozen.
Since even the nuances brought in by transformations are brought in by
zeroable words, this means that all the information expressed in the sentences of the language is expressed in the subset consisting of their unreduced, possibly reconstructed, source sentences which have only the entry
structure. And since the entry relation has little or no grammatical restriction on the words of an entry class, but only differences in likelihood, this
means that the information in language is expressible in these unrestricted
entry constructions. Thus it is not any complexities of the real world of
information that are responsible for the complexities so characteristic of
grammar. For the information alone, a very simple system, the entry-order,
suffices.
One sees from the entry and reductions analysis that the structure of
language is an information-carrying system; if we take its discreteness into
account it is even better understandable as an information-transmission
system. If we exclude gestural, non-grammatical, features such as intonations of irony, language has no structural provision for the expression of
feeling; one only makes statements, possibly false, that one has this or another feeling. The use oflanguage as a vehicle for feeling and art, as in poetry,
is done by a secondary manipulation of an existing language and grammar.
And where the structure of music, certainly a vehicle for feeling and art,
includes such elements as sequences of notes and variations defined on the
sequence, the word-sequences of language, as also the symbol-sequences of
mathematics, are only projections of the partially ordered entries.
The informational character of language comes out even more sharply in
the specialized languages of individual sciences, where one can see not only a
somewhat different grammar, but even something new: a somewhat different type of grammar, made possible by the consistency of subject-matter
and by the fact that whereas language has no external metalanguage, the
sublanguage of a science can draw upon the whole language for its metalanguage.
From the nature of the separate structural features which together create
language, one can see a naturally growing instrument for transmitting information. The entry requirement is an adequate form for predication,
which is seen, e.g. in the derivation of the interrogative, to be the source
information-device for all language ; if a word of class Y is daid only provided
one has said a word of class X, then Y exists in sentences only as something
said on X - as close a structure for predicating Y of X as one might expect.

GRAMMAR ON MATHEMATICAL PRINCIPLES

411

Language is also reasonably efficient when looked upon as a naturally
developed instrument for transmitting information. First, it is the least
structure needed for the entry relation: the arguments are only N, 0, and not
arbitrary subclasses of 0, or even On as vs. 0 0 , etc. And the number of
arguments goes up to only two or three -longer arguments could always be
paraphrased by operators on operators. Second, the reductions do not take
place upon sentences as a whole (e.g. by judging their redundancy) but upon
the entering words (by jUdging their informational contribution in respect to
each other). Third, the reductions make for a great shortening of the sentence without changing its information. The degeneracies which result from
some of them could have been avoided by having different reductional
shapes. That they do not avoid this is as much a result of the unplanned
character of language as are the homonyms that result from certain sound
changes.
One item of efficiency, or of unplannedness, is that many reductions have
become rules rather than preferences. For example, the difference between
verbs and adjectives can be stated as the tense being attached directly in the
case of the less durative operators (verbs), and via a carrier be in the case of
the more durative operators (adjectives). Borderline cases could have remained a matter of preference, depending either upon the speaker or upon
the meaning in the context: e.g. sleep, ill could have been sometimes said as
verbs and sometimes as adjectives. Instead, although different languages
make different decisions about such words, within a language each word is
fixed - sleep a verb, ill an adjective - so that to use ill with the less-durative,
verb-like, placing of tense constitutes not merely a delicate variation in
meaning but an outright 'mistake', a flouting of convention, albeit a very old
convention, and not one maintained by institutional interests. Whether one
sees this as efficiency or as an unneccessary restriction upon freedom of
action may depend upon one's views of what is desirable in society.
Given all this, the structure oflanguage can be seen as an outgrowth ofthe
uses in which language was developed. There is no need to appeal to some
independently existing structure or structuralism - whose existence before
language or independent of language could in any case not be explained - to
see how the structure of language came to be what it is.
NOTES
1

Given as a lecture in Sommerville College, Oxford, 16 march, 1977.

16

OPERATOR GRAMMAR OF ENGLISH

II. SKETCH OF ENGLISH GRAMMAR 2

The ordered entries and reductions described in Paper 15, Sec. 7 suffice to
produce the sentences of English, in a way that indicates their meanings and
grammatical ambiguities. 3 A grammar of this kind requires only a list of
words for every argument-requirement set (e.g., N, On' Onn. 0 0 , Ono. and a
list of the specific reductions (along the types indicated there) with the
subdomain of words on which the reduction acts and with the conditions
which must be satisfied in order for it to act. Any ordering of the reductions
follows from the order in which their conditions come to be satisfied. Such a
grammar arranges the grammatical structures in ways that are not customary. Therefore it may be useful to have a sketchy overview of English
grammar in a more traditional organization, in order to see how the main
structures are reached by the entries and reductions. 4
1. Word-formation

The great bulk of affixes can be analyzed as being produced by the syntax
acting on mostly affixless words.
A few affixes are neither operators nor arguments. In English, it is convenient to consider the present tense -s a being an indicator of operator
status, with only loosely present-tense meaning; later, other tense morphemes can replace it. In addition, somewhat as some languages places caseendings on noun-occurrences to indicate their status as first or second, etc.,
arguments of particular sets of operators, so English and many other languages place an argument indicator (English -ing, as also that, whether, to)
on an operator which has become an argument, and further indicators (,s,
of, by) on its arguments in turn.
The remaining affixes can be considered to be operators or arguments in
the sentences in which they occur. There is some question about the analysis
of the English plural and tense affixes, and a few others, chiefly the feminine
and diminutive (e.g. lioness, booklet). Here the affix can be obtained as a
modifier of its host (the word to which it is attached): He walked +- he
walks; his walking is before [some other operator]; lioness +- a lion which is
female. However, it is also possible to obtain most of these affixes in the
same way as the other affixes of English, as follows:
Excerpts from Lingvisticae Investigationes 2 (1978) 55-92, John Benjamins B.V., Amsterdam.

412

OPERA TOR GRAMMAR OF ENGLISH

413

In English, virtually all suffixes, and final words of a compound, have the
status that the preceding word to which they are attached is their modifier or
second-argument, where 'X is a modifier of Y' means that X is the residue after zeroing which is - of a relative clause attached to Y. And prefixes are
generally operators, unstressed and phonemically changed, but requiring no
permutation, with the words to which they are attached being their second
arguments. The affixes are thus the syntactically important element, which
has been reduced to affix form not because of their syntactic unimportance
but because of their broad selection: as noted, the meanings of affixes, and
thus of the operators whose reductions they would be, are have property,
have tendency, be in a state, be a result, be an agent, negation, cause, etc. words which have very broad selection in respect to their second argument.
It is of interest that almost all suffixes can be obtained via compound nouns,
where the position of the final element is due to the compound form, so that
the reduction to suffix is simply in stress (and suppletion, to be considered
immediately):
He is in his second childhood~
He is in his second child-state~
He is in the second state of his being a child
A's correlation with B is considerable~
A's correlating-degree with B is considerable~
The degree of A's correlating with B is considerable
It should be noted that the modifiers (e.g. second) and operators (e.g. considerable) on the affixed word are often selected by the affix, which is syntactically the head of the affixed word.
As an example of a suffix with known history, we have adverbial-ly (only
partly different from the -ly of manly). Historically, we have here an indirect
case of the noun for body,form, with an adjective modifier A, equivalent in
free words (with prepositions for lost case-endings) to PAN. As the noun
with its case-ending was reduced in situ to a suffix, the Aly retained the
syntactic status of PAN: in A manner (or: form). As elsewhere, the word is
the modifier of its affix.
In -hood and -ly we see a situation which is significant through not
common: Our inability to find the free-standing word which had been reduced to the suffix is due to the loss of that word (outside of affix position) in
competition with some other word (e.g. state, way in the two cases), so that
instead of saying that -hood is the reduction of the modern form of had we
have to say that it is a suppletive reduction of state or the like in compoundnoun position. Such suppletive relations can be found also for affixes which

414

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

present no evidence of a historical source in a free-standing word. The importance of stating the possibility of such a relation is in showing that the
relation of affixes to their host is not something over and above relations
existing between separate words, namely not something different from operator-argument relations (in terms of which 'modifier' will be defined below).
Morphology, for all its being a separate machinery in language, does not do
anything in its occurrence in English sentences that cannot be done by
syntax. This is not to say that all morphology is a deposit of syntactic events.
Some of it is, as in the case of -hood. Some of it goes back to the syntactic
morphology of operator and argument indicators, as in the case of the caseending which is an essential part of the source of adverbial -ty. Much of it, in
one language or another, may well have existed independently of syntax: but
syntax has accomodated it, using the affixed words in ways equivalent to
simple-w7/constructions.
2. Word Classes

Since the entry theory admits word-class distinctions (N, On 0 etc.) only in
respect to the entry-requirements as seen above, we consider - very sketchily
- how the various morphological and syntactic classes are obtained from
these.
First, the specialization of operators into verbs, adjectives, prepositions,
and nouns (such asfather oj). The verbs are separated off from the others by
the fact that the loosely present-tense operator-indicator is attached directly
to the operator, whereas for the others it is in some languages said separately
(phonemicaIIy carried by be) and in other languages omitted entirely. The
other tenses, which replace the argument-indicator (even in those cases where
the present tense is omitted), arise from before, after, and possibly other
time-order connectives to other operators in the sentence, and ultimately to
the zeroed I say or other metalinguistic operator which can be reconstructed
as the latest entry on the sentence. s The operators which are generally more
likely to occur under time-order operators relating tham to other verbs in
the sentence are the ones which get the tense directly, and so become verbs:
walk, hope, as against large,father. The decision as to which operators are so
treated is fixed by historical convention, and does not vary with current
estimates of likelihood. Of the non-verb-operators, the prepositions are a
small set of short words with very broad selection: up, near, to, etc. In some
languages they are distinguished from adjectives in that the affixes arising
from their noun arguments (plural, gender, etc.) do not spread to them. The
noun operators, such as father of, are the most stable in respect to their
arguments, i.e. the least likely to be under time-order operators, and are
therefore subject to the same affixes as primitive-argument nouns, in receiving plural suffix, in selecting gender or sex affixes (whereas adjectives, if they
0 ,

OPERATOR GRAMMAR OF ENGLISH

415

receive such, do so only by spread - 'agreement' - from their argument
noun), and in being appositions to the (below). The remaining operators are
the adjectives.
The referential pronouns are replacements of second occurences of an
argument; and the other pronouns are simply nouns (or arguments) of nonspecific allusion.
The subordinate conjunctions, e.g. because, when, providing, are obtained
from operators 0 00 on two sentences modifying their own first sentence:
He is late; his being late is because it is cold
~ He is late, which is because it is cold
~ He is late because it is cold

This applies also to conjunctional words when the second sentence is nominalized, as in He is late due to its being cold from He is late; his being late is
due to its being cold. The conjunctional words are either is Ving, is Vedforms
(e.g. providing, whence the is for the which is zeroing), or else historically
derived from pronouns, prespositions plus nouns (e.g. because from by
cause), and adjectives, so that there is no problem in relating them to the
previously defined word-classes.
The derivation via which is provides precisely the shiftings of adverbs and
subordinate clauses into various points of the primary sentence: it is the shift
that occurs also for noun-modifiers, upon zeroing of which is. It explains
how these are nested, each adverb referring to the verb or adjective together
with the intervening adverbs between itself and the verb or adjective. It
explains also why adverbs of the verb (e.g. of manner: rapidly) are closest to
the verb, while adverbs of the sentence (e.g. of fact: probably) and subordinate clauses are farther (except when separated by commas), and can
comfortably occur before the subject:
Because it is cold, he probably is rapidly clearing the road
(but not * He is rapidly probably clearing the road).
In particular, it explains directly the various positions into which subordinate clauses can enter when there are three or more sentences involved:
He refused to go because they invited him only because they had to
Because only because they had to they invited him, he refused to
go

and so on. The derivation via which is also fits the interpretation of these
sentences, with both the primary sentence above and the adverb or conjunctional clause being separately asserted: He walks rapidly asserts both that he

416

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

walks and that his walking is rapid, whereas His walking is rapid does not
quite assert that he actually walks.
There are various words which do not seem to fit the entry-requirement
possibilities. Chief of these are the words which imply something not stated
in the sentence (e.g. only, even), or which can only occur on conjoined sentences (e.g. either, both), or which look like conjunctions but can occur
together with and (e.g. yet, therefore). None of these can occur in the first
sentence of a discourse without requiring explanation. Like all other words
which seem peculiar, these words can be obtained from the regular argumentrequirement classes, by means of only the regular reductions of the language. The key in the case of these words is that they are 0 00 (rarely, 0nn)
operators one or both of whose arguments has been zeroed on high likelihood grounds, either as being repetition or else as being non-specific.
We consider so. The many uses of so can be obtained if we take them all as
an 000' 0nn operator, roughly in accord with with a pronoun, say that, as its
second argument. The different so are due to the different known uses of
that. Thus in
I practiced quietly and so so did John do so so
The fourth so is in accord with that where that pronouns quietly (or: quiet
manner), without whose presence in the first sentence, the last so couldn't
exist in the second. The first so is in accord with that where that pronouns the
whole first sentence:
and in accord with my practicing, so did John do so
The third so is in accord with that where that pronouns practicing, the nominalized verb (with second argument, if any) repeated from the first sentence.
The verb cannot be pronouned without its sentence being nominalized as
the second argument of an aspectual operator do:
I practice and John did his (or: some) practicing
-+ I practiced and John did so

as though from

I did my (or: some) practicing, and John did so (too)
where the my is not contrastive and therefore does not interfere with so (as
also in Eisenhower led his party to victory and later Kennedy did so). More
precisely, the second sentence must have been John did something which is in

OPERA TOR GRAMMAR OF ENGLISH

417

accord with that -+ John did something which is so -+ John did so. Otherwise,
the norminalized verb would have been pronouned directly by that: and
John did practicing too -+ and John did too. Also, the whole verb plus object
together with its tense could have been zeroed as a repetition, yielding
I practiced, and John too

Independently of how the verb of the second sentence is pronouned or
zeroed, if it is at all, the second sentence can have a roughly adverb-ofsentence in accord with that where the that pronouns an argument (usually
the first) out of the first sentence. When reduced to so, this usually moves to
immediately before the second sentence, with the permutation of subject and
tense in the second sentence that is associated with certain other front adverbs:
He studied architecture and so did she study architecture
He studied architecture and so (too) she studied architecture
He studied architecture and so (too) a bit of city-planning

This is the second so above, meaning here similarly to him, or in the last
example similarly to architecture.
In all these cases of so the semantic effect and the correlation with what
mayor may not occur in either sentence, follows from the antecedent of that
in each case. More generally, it is seen in such analyses that the peculiarities
of meaning and of environment of words reviewed here follow from their
source and their reductions, and that the various uses of each word, which
may seem quite disparate, are obtained from a single origin and not from
an ad hoc assumption of different homonyms for the different cases.
Certain other special words are discussed more naturally elsewhere: the,
and quantifiers, in the noun-phrase, and do and the auxiliaries in the verbphrase.
There remain several important and grammatically peculiar words, which
have one property: they are part of the metalinguistic portion ofa sentence.
Every language has words for speaking about itself, and sentences can contain words referring to parts of the sentence (e.g. the latter). Certain metalinguistic operators have the special reduction from that, whether to colon,
dropping the argument-indicator on the sentence which is their argument
and about which they are speaking: I know that he is here -+ I know: He is
here. Of these, a few are zeroable, being reconstructible from the intonation:
I say, I ask, I request. English has three operators, and, or, not, whose
sentences do not carry argument-indicators. This can be explained by their
being not independent operators but parts of the I say operators: and, or

418

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

from some such operators as I co-state, I state disjunctively (I offer a
choice); not from I deny. Of course, these are largely artificial reconstructions from the common and, or, not. However, these three can be shown to
be, in the grammar itself, operators (binary or unary) on sentences, not on
words. They differ from other operators in not having any tense (operatorindicator) properties, and therewith not nominalizing their arguments at
any stage of derivation. In addition, not has peculiarities of position among
the words of its sentence. All of these situations, and others, are accountable
for if they are taken as syntactically equivalent to what would be obtained if
they were reductions from metalinguistic operators: I co-state SI' S2 ...... I
say: SI and S2; I state a choice of SI' S2 ...... I say: SI or S2; I deny S ...... I say:
not S. Behind all this lies the fact that and, or, not are the three operators
which are in effect identical as between language and set-theoretic systems.
They are such because they are part not of the object language but of the
metalanguage, of the speaking of the object language.
The other type of metalinguistic operator is that mentioned in fn. I:
appending to a sentence (via semicolon) the operator same, with entry-locations in that sentence as arguments of same. This same as such-and-such an
entry is the sole equipment necessary to make all the instructions about
repetitional pronouning and zeroing a part of the sentence in which the
referential reduction occurs. Again, the reductions of course do not really go
through such a secondary sentence. However the information about sameness which is necessary for these reductions has to be given, and because it is
couched in words, and because it has to locate the entry in the sentence
which cannot be done without citing the sentence, it is in any case de facto
an appendage to the sentence in which the reductions are taking place.

3. The Noun-phrase
'Noun-phrase', conventionally a construction containing a noun-word as
head, or substitutable for such, is an imprecise term. In the present theory,
the morphological and local-syntax (e.g. plural, and relation to the) properties of nouns are found in the primitive arguments, but not in the nonspecific N, such as that, this, one, something (which, though often called
pronouns, are not replacements of any nouns). These properties are also
found in certain operators which, because of their extreme durativity, are
included in the domain of the reductions which lead to -s plural, the, etc.
Thusfather of and fact in He is thefather of 3 children; That she left is afact
are operators Onn and 00 respectively) no less than He fathered three children, That she left is quite factual.
On the other hand, the larger syntactic property of being an argument is
common to the primitive arguments (nouns and non-specific "pronouns"
but not operator-nouns) and to all 'operators (sentences) carying argument-

OPERATOR GRAMMAR OF ENGLISH

419

indicators, i.e. when they are operated upon by a further operator. It even
applies to the arguments of and, or, not (or, rather, of their metalinguistic
sources), which do not carry an argument-indicator. This does not mean,
however, that the argument-sentences are noun replacements, for operators
under which the sentences appear as arguments are in general different from
the operators under which the primitive nouns appear as arguments. The
argument sentences are like the primitive-argument nouns only in being
arguments - but of different operators. Morphologically and constructionally, that she leJt,for John to purchase books are in no way like noun-phrases.
One form, John's purchasing books is a bit like a noun-phrase in that John's
is also a modifier in a noun-phrase, but purchasing books can hardly be fitted
in. There are further forms of argument sentence whose construction does
indeed conform to noun-phrases, but each such form is a reduction from a
noun modified by the given argument-sentence. These are such forms as
John's purchasing oj books, John's purchase oj books John's book-purchase,
all of them with subject or object zeroable if they are non-specific or repetitions.
The passage from the not fully noun-like John's sketching trees to the
noun·like John's sketching oj trees is seen for example in

I imitated the manner oj John's sketching trees
The manner oj John's sketching is hesistant
where the oj is not required, as against

I imitated John's sketching oj trees
John's sketching oj trees is hesitant
in which the oj is required, and which we can reach via manner oj sketching
-+ sketching-manner -+ sketching with zeroed compound-head -manner. The
oj completes the noun-phrase form of the nominalized sentence, because oj
trees looks like a modifier of a noun; this noun has to be understood as being
not the Ving of sketching trees, but the Ving of sketching oj trees - e.g. it is
only the latter that can be pluralized: His many (or: constant) sketchings oj
trees, but not *His many (or: constant) sketchings trees. The argument here
is that Ving is not in itself noun-like, but becomes so in the oj-form, and that
both the insertion of oj and the change in Ving are due to the compounding
of this Ving with a noun (e.g. manner) which is later zeroed.
Similar analyses show that there is grammatical reason for deriving, e.g.
Your attention is required from Your state oj attending is required and His
attention was inadequate from His amount oj attending was inadequate; and
Alertness is required from One's state oj being allert is required, His alterness

420

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

was inadequate from His amount of being alert was inadequate. Thus also He
is a teacher of physics is obtained from

t He is a teaching-person of physics
+- He is a person in the teaching of physics
+- He is a person who is in the teaching of physics
+- He is a person; the same person is in the teaching of physics

where the teaching of physics is obtained from one's teaching of physics by
zeroing of the non-specific subject. And The walk was too long is obtained
from

t The walking-bit was too long
The bit of walking was too long
The bit of one's walking was too long
+- The bit was too long; one's walking was in a bit
++-

The suffix, as in -er, or the zero, as in a walk, sketching of, are reductions of
the perSall, manner, state, amount, bit, etc. which were the head of the Vingcompound noun. It is therefore not surprising that the operators and modifiers in these can be selected by the zeroed head noun as well as by the V.
Thus a poor teacher of physics is either from a person who is in poor teaching ,ofphysics or from a poor person who is in the teaching ofphysics; a quick
walk is from a piece (or: bit) of quick walking, while a short walk is from a
short piece of 1m/king.
Full nominalization of sentences and of operators is thus obtained from
nouns that have as modifiers those sentences (which necessarily carry argument-indicators, but are not themselves fully noun-like).
The noun-phrase is built up from nouns by addition of modifiers, conjoined segments (and N), quantifiers, and some special affixes. All modifiers
are secondary sentences (under semicolon) which have undergone wh-pronouning and have thus become relative clauses. Modifiers of the noun arise
when the wh-pronouned argument in the secondary sentence (as well as its
antecedent in the primary) is a noun:
A man rushed up; the man seemed angry
A man rushed up, who seemed angry
A man, who seemed angry, rushed up

Similarly A man whom we thought deranged, rushed up from A man rushed
up; we thought that man deranged.
In most relative clauses with is, the which is, who is can be zeroed. When

OPERATOR GRAMMAR OF ENGLISH

421

the residue after this zeroing is PN (with not more than one or two leftmodifiers on the N), or certain A (including adjectives formed from other
words), the N (with zeroed P) and A can permute to before the host (i.e. the
antecedent of the which, who), thus becoming 'left-modifiers.' If the P is for
or the like in the sense of especially for, characteristically of the permuting N
forms a compound with its host:
The ballot-box is empty
<-- The box for ballots is empty
<-- The box which is for ballots is empty.

Compounding also occurs from Ving PN as in book-burning, and APN as in
stone-gray. If the position of P here is occupied by is of the type (or: class), is
called, or the like, the N permutes without the compound stress pattern:
A Ming vase broke
<-- A vase of the class Ming broke
<-- A vase which is of the class (or: period) Ming broke

In the case of A, the permuting is required:
A small vase broke
<-- A vase which is small broke

When a noun already has one or more modifiers, any further secondary
sentence which becomes a relative clause operates on, and thus speaks
about, the noun as already modified. And when it is permuted, this further
relative clause is permuted to after or before the noun with the modifiers
already next to it. Hence the later modifiers, which necessarily present properties of the noun as already modified, are farther from the noun than the
previously-entering modifiers. This creates an order of modifiers, especially
clear when all the modifiers are on the left, in which the modifiers nearer the
norm are its more durative or essential modifiers (especially those which are
themselves nouns) and the ones further out are less and less so. Thus (I) He
has a new red car <-- He has a red car, the same red car is new, while (2) He has
a red nell' car <-- He has a new car, the same new car is red. Preferred orders
arise, since (1) speaks of a new case of red cars, while (2) speaks in the less
likely framework of a red case of new cars.
When the residue of zeroed which is, who is is a noun (without P), it does
not move leftward, and is then said to be in apposition to its host:
My friend, who is an Ambassador, returned
- My friend, an Ambassador, returned

422

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

In the relative clause, there is the well-known distinction between the
nonrestrictive case
A (or: the) man, who seemed angry, rushed up

and the restrictive case
A (or: the) man who seemed angry rushed up

The difference in meaning is that in the restrictive case the man's anger is
known before his rushing up. As to form, the problem is to explain the loss
of the comma. In the present system, the non-restrictive is obtained from
A man rushed up; the man seemed angry

and the restrictive form
One rushed up; the same one is a man; the man seemed angry
-> One rushed up, the same one is a man, I'l/ho seemed angry
-> One, who is a man who seemed angry, rushed up

The comma in the man, who relative clause is reduced when that becomes
part of the further relative clause with one, who; and the zeroings of which is,
who is and of the non-specific one (with its comma) are well-established
reductions. The meaning of the restrictive clause is thus due to the fact that
seemed angry joins man before man (with its attached seemed angry) joins
rushed up.
As to the definite article. This is a late development in the languages that
have it, and is in general historically derived from demonstrative pronouns.
In the present theory it is obtainable by well-established reductions from a
restrictive relative clause containing the apposition of a noun-phrase to the
non-specific noun that:

t Something jell; same something is that; that is a box
->

t Something fell; same something is that, which is a box

-> Something, which is that which is a box, fell
->

The box jell

The comma after that is lost when that itself enters in a relative clause under
zeroable something which is. The new step is the morphophonemic reduction
of that which is to the. It turns out that the referential, generic, and unique
uses of the are all among the uses of non-specific that which is, so that

OPERATOR GRAMMAR OF ENGLISH

423

there is no need to posit different the - or different that. This derivation
explains many properties of the. For example. the is insistently first of the
noun-modifiers simply because it is in apposition to the noun with all its
modifiers. Also, a noun with the cannot become a left modifier. although a
noun with modifier can: a trip in a heavy truck --+ a heavy-truck trip but a
trip ill the truck --+ *a the-truck trip. This analysis explains why *A fact is
That she left does not exist but The fact is that she left does. The reason is
that fact is an operator, is aract, rather than a primitive argument. Hence,
while we do not have Afact is ... (exept when zeroed from Having afact is ...
etc.), we do have That is afact. We form:
t Something is that she left; same something is that; that is afact
--+ t Something is that she left; same something is that, which is
a fact
--+ Something, which is the fact, is that she left
--+ The fact is that she left

We also see why there is no * (1) A mammal is a dog (except in a special
sense) whereas there exists A dog is a mammal and The mammal is a dog.
Given that is means is the same as and is a case (or: member) of, we have no
(I), but we can have That is a dog and That is a mammal, from which we
can get That 1I'hich is a mammal is a dog, whence the. Note also that operators on the N can be selected either by N or by the: thus in The family
doctor knoll's his patients the operator is clearly in the selection of doctor .. but
in The jamily doctor is jast disappearing the operator refers to that, in the
sense of that thing, that type, which becomes the.
As to the quantifiers, some, many, all, etc. They present problems because
they seem to be left-modifiers, yet some of them do not occur naturally in
relative clauses (e.g. all books, t books which are all); also some of them have
adverbial as well as adjectival features. In the present theory, some of them
can be obtained as non-specific nouns in close apposition like the:e.g. Some
young man came +- Some came; some were young men. Others are obtained
by an operator on the and of Nand N, whence also their adverbial features.
Thus it may be that Few men came, Three men came should be obtained as
follows:

t A man came and a man came, amounting to few (or: three)
--+ t A man and a man, amounting to few (or: three), came
--+ Men, amounting to few

(or: three) came

-+ Few (or: three) men came

The operator amount to helps explain the scale construction (It is 5 feet high,

424

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

etc.). When operating on and, it yields a source from which the plural suffix
can be obtained:

t A stone fell and a stone fell, amounting to a (or: some) number
~ t A stone and a stone, amounting to a number, fell
~ Stones fell

This derivation yields the indefiniteness of the plural from the indefiniteness
of the operator on the and, and it yields the fact that there must be more than
one from the and in the operand. The reduction from Nand N to N plus
plural does not require an operator on the and; we have one and a halfpints
from one pint and a half ( of a) pint; it is the indefiniteness of the plural that
does. The object of amount to, later zeroed, could be some, or a comparable
indefinite, rather than a number.
Genders and case-endings hardly exist in English. Case-endings (and in
some languages prepositions in VPN) are argument-indicators showing the
argument-position of a noun in respect to its operator. Different operators
may impose different case-endings upon, say, their second argument; this
may be looked upon as being a classifactory part of the operator without
being an independent entry. There may also be a particular operator whose
second argument takes either, say, the accusative or the genitive, usually
with different meanings of the operator. In such cases, it may be possible to
show that all arguments of the verb have the same ordered case-endings but
thai one of the arguments has been zeroed. One such situation is He taught
physics to the freshmen, by the side of He taught the freshmen, which we can
obtain be zeroing from He taught something to the freshmen. If such zeroing
is impossible, the deviant argument-indicator has to be viewed as containing
a new operator.
In cases where arguments can take, say, a masculine or a feminine affix
depending on whether a male or female is meant, the gender affix is the
equivalent of an entry, a reduced word stating that the argument in question
is male or that it is female. In cases where different arguments receive different genders, the genders are classificatory parts of the argument-words
(like certain case-endings, above) without being independent entries, either
operator or argument. Arguably, these classificatory portions can be looked
upon as phoneme sequences which do not quite have syntactic status - more
of a status than s/-, g/- in English words, and differently than per-, con-, in
perceive, conceive, but nevertheless not quite entities of the syntax.
The count-noun property in English, while complex in domain and in
environment, is analyzable as a gender of the latter type. It is a requirement
of a proclitic a on nouns of a subset unless the N carries the, etc., or certain
quantifiers, or is in certain second-argument situations.

OPERATOR GRAMMAR OF ENGLISH

425

Certain languages have concord in respect to gender, case, plural, between
nouns and certain operators on the nouns, especially when the operators
appear as modifiers on the nouns. The involves no more than morphophonemics, the locating of phonemic segments depends on the occurrence of the
affix in question on the noun.
Finally, the referential pronoun he, which, etc., are not entries but reductions, made possible by the metalinguistic pperator same.
4. The verb-phrase

The term verb-phrase usually refers to the non-nominalized operator, with
its tense, certain special operators on it, its complements (i.e. complex
second arguments), and its modifiers.
As was noted above, a fixed set of operators, which have a generally less
durative character, receive the operator-indicator -s directly, and are called
verbs. The others have the operator-indicator preceding them, carried by be.
Thus' they have the appearance of a two-word verb phrase: be angry, be up,
be a father of, be a fact.
The characteristic element is the tense. It would have been possible for the
tense to be a reduction of now, in the past, etc. However, it turns out that
both grammatically and semantically, at least in English, the tense on an
operator is equivalent to a reduction of time-order conjunctions, i.e. before,
after in respect to another operator in the sentence: it expresses the time
order in respect to another verb. This is visible in He had spoken to her before
she left, He planned that he would speak to her. But in each sentence there.
remains at least one verb which has no further verb to which is can be timeordered, unless we appeal to the metalinguistic I say, I ask, etc. which can be
presumed to exist on every sentence and to have been zeroed. The time-order
of these verbs in respect to the I say, I ask is equivalent to the usual meaning
of 'past', 'future' in respect to the speaker's 'subjective' tense. However,
claiming that -ed comes from before my saying this is equivalent to claiming
that it means 'before the speaker's speaking'. The difference is that in the
former the information about the speaking of a sentence is included in the
sentence itself, something which is made grammatically possible by the likelihood-zeroing, and which then simplifies many things in grammar.
The syntactic status of the tense is problematic. It can best be treated,
especially in English, by saying that the base tense is simply the operatorindicator, which is only vaguely time-specific: -s is used for present (i.e. same
time as the speaking), for timeless (two plus two equals four) and all-time
(He's always late, though he happens to be on time today), for past and future
in certain conditions (Then Caesar says to Anthony ... ; I go tomorrow).
Although the other tenses also have ranges of meaning, including evidential

426

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

rather than temporal, they are more time-specific, and can well be considered equivalent to before, after in respect to other verbs of the sentence.
Since these tenses appear as replacers of the present-tense operator-indicator, the simplest way to obtain them is to say that on a given verb -s -+ ed
before which is before, and -s -+ will before which is after, much as whether N
tense V -+ : tense NV? after I ask. Then the which is before (or: after) is
zero able, as being the unique (hence maximally likely) modifier of the verb
after -ed, will respectively.
Then the source of He plans that he will speak to her is

t I say he plans his speaking to her; his speaking to her is after
his planning
-+ t I say he plans that he will speak to her, which is after his
planning
-+ He plans that he will speak to her

And for He planned that he would speak to her, starting with the above result:

t I say he plans that he will speak to her; his planning that he will
speak to her is before my saying this
-+ t I say he planned that he would speak to her, which is before
my saying this
-+ He planned that he would speak to her
Thus the -s has various time-meanings, but involves no conjunction to anything else. In contrast, the -ed, will arise on a verb when it is under a timeorder conjunction to another verb. Note that the -ed is placed not only on the
operator in question but also on any tense that had already been established
in respect to that operator. This is a source of the double tenses, such as
would.
Deriving tense from the time-order conjunctions before, after, explains the
relation of time conjunctions to a little-understood tense-related element:
aspect, i.e. grades of durativity and the like. Within the verb set proper,
some are relatively durative (sleep) and others momentaneous (arrive). Under
time-conjunctions, only certain ordered pairs of these occur. E.g. John slept
until Tom arrived, but not *John arrived until Tom slept (except for 'kept on
arriving until Tom fell asleep'). These distinctions come out naturally if we
say that between the tensed verb and the time-conjunction there is an intervening operator of duration, mostly moment, period:
John slept throughout the period (lasting) until the moment at
which Tom arrived

OPERATOR GRAMMAR OF ENGLISH

427

This is not to say that one cannot say sleep at a moment, arive throughout a
period, a moment (lasts) until a period (whatever that means) or a period
(lasts) until a period. But these combinations are far less likely than sleep
throughout a period, arrive at a moment, a period (lasts) until a moment, so
that only the latter are zeroed, whereas there is no zeroing in:
John arrived throughout a period lasting until the moment at
which Tom slept

Under certain operators, the argument sentences (under 000' the second
one) are necessarily later in time than the higher operator: 1 want that he
should go, 1 order that he go. Under these operators, the future tense which
the argument-sentence would carry in respect to the operator on it is zeroed
as being most likely, or reduced to should. This is the subjunctive in English:
t I order that he goes; his going is after my ordering it. -'1 order that he will
go - 1 order that he go.
We next consider the special operators such as the auxiliaries. We begin
with operators on a sentence: John knows that Mary is on time, John expects
Mary to be on time. If the argument sentence is subjunctive, in the N to V
form, then its subject is zeroable if it is the same as the preceding subject of
the higher operator: John expects to be on time - John expects himself to be
on time. For some higher operators this sameness of subjects is usually the
case: John tries to be on time; though it is possible to have also John tries/or
Mary to be on time; something which is less unusual in other languages, e.g.
with French essayer. Now, the English auxiliaries, as in He can be on time,
seem to be something else again, since they are unthinkable with a different
second subject (* He can/or her to be on time), so that they seem to be a new
grammatical entity: a pre-posed tense-rejecting operator on the verb. Historically, these are past-tense 0no verbs which were not necessarily restricted
to having their own subject repeated in their argument-sentence. They reject
a tense because they already contain a tense, even though they are not felt as
containing a tense, because by their meaning the past-tense verb ('had the
ability, the possibility', etc.) reflects upon the present situation. The required
zeroing of to (as in * He can to be on time) is not unique to them, occuring
also in let go, make him go. And the fact that the auxiliaries are not a new
grammatical category but simply the resultants of several reductions together is seen in the existence of a number of near-auxiliaries which have only
some of the reductions, e.g. dare, need, ought. However, one might think that
even though the auxiliaries are historically the product of reductions from
0no (and in part 0nn) verbs, they have now entered a new syntactic status of
being operators on a verb alone and not on a sentence. In considering this
possibility, we must ask what happened to the ancestor of, say, can in the

428

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

sentences where it cannot now be used. First the fact that the tense is inseparable in the auxiliaries can be used to explain why they do not occur
with other tenses, or under to and -ing. But they did occur there, indeed up
to Middle English. And when they dropped from use there it was undoubtedly not that the sentences ceased being said but that can, etc., were replaced there by other 'competing' words. These replacers, to be capable oj, had
been able to, knowing how, etc., remain as complementary variants of can in
those positions, and occasionally as free variants of can even in the positions
in which can occurs today - visibly so in parallel sentences (He can work, and
will remain able to do so). When we consider the possibility of can before a
verb with a different subject - different from that of can - it is hard to imagine
how even the replacers of an earlier, more fully occurring, ancestor of can
could occur in such a position: e.g.? He has the ability for his group to play
Bach. But even if the latter is excluded, it is excluded on the basis of meaning, not of gross grammatical structure. And if can is a suppletive variant of
such words, then it is not grammatically excluded from the set ano' the set of
verbs whose object is a sentence. Of course, the specialized shape of the
auxiliaries goes uniquely with their special environments; but we can say
that this is a product of special reductions, and that it does not violate the
types of entry requirement found in other operators of the language.
The difficulties with do are quite different. Chiefly: When its object is a
nominalized verb or sentence, do is an ann operator of minimal meaning (as
in do the dishes, do a jig): do book-binding, do the job of binding of books.
When it occurs as an apparent pro-verb, it is really the same ann used to
circumvent the fact that pro-wording (especially the wh-pronouns) is
available only for nouns. Hence in What will he do, oppose it? and What he
will do is oppose it (or What he will do is to oppose it) the underlying form is
t He will do the act ofone's opposing it, t He will do the act which isfor one to
oppose it or the like, a form which is gone through this time not by the
grammarian but by the language itself, i.e. by its speaker's regularities - in
order to be able to pronoun the act of one's apposing it by what. And in the
did of What did he do (the future of which is will and not will do), the do is the
carrier for the tense affix which has been permuted away from its moorings,
just as is the be in He is glad.
It is thus possible to analyze do and the auxiliaries without resorting to
new or restricted types of entry-relations. In contrast, the details of occurrence for will (as against the regular verb wills) show that it is no longer
simply a variant of 0 no from which it is historically descended, and is syntactically a tense, i.e. an operator-indicator replacement under the conjunction (0 00 ) ajier.
There are cases of operators which seem to have become tense-like, but
not on closer examination. If we take He has spoken as equivalent to a

OPERA TOR GRAMMAR OF ENGLISH

429

reduction of t He has the state of speaking, then has is the regular verb
meaning 'to hold, to contain' which when used of situations means that
those situations are completely extant and not merely emergent or continuing: e.g. in a person having a given age, or having an understanding of a
problem, or having little Latin. The suffix -enj-ed, which has complex historical orgins but is different from the past-tense -ed, appears from earliest
times in the sense of 'provided with, in the state of (having)' as in toothed,
moneyed, and is found in the English perfect 'a complete (or: completed)
state of as in He has spoken, He has bought it, and in the passive, where the
object of the verb is stated to be the recipient of the state engendered by the
verb (the box was lifted +- t The Box was in the state of the lifting of it). Ifwe
take the -enj-ed as not merely meaning 'completely extant state' but as being
syntactically equivalent to a reduction (via a compound) of some such word
as state in this sense, then in terms of the present theory the perfect-form He
has spoken is obtained from t He has a state; His speaking is a state +- tHe
has the (complete) state of speaking.
With somewhat less difficulty we can obtain the progressive He is speaking from He is in the process of speaking (or some other word instead of
process, as in a-hunting from on hunting), from t He is in a process; (his)
speaking is a process (or: is in process). In both perfect and progressive the
syntactic statuses can still be taken as has a state, is in process with a sentence
(of zeroable subject - same or indefinite) as argument of state, process in a
secondary sentence.
We next consider what are called verb-complements to see if they present
difficulties to the entry theory. By this theory, the arguments of an operator
can only be some sequence of Nand 0, with 0 carrying its own arguments
with it (hence being a sentence). For many verbs this description is adequate
without further ado. Under some verbs, reductions can take place. Thus
under consider we have that this is adequate -+ this to be adequate -+ this
adequate. Under all verbs whose object is subjunctive (i.e. later than the
operator) we have that he (should) go -+ (for) him to go: I order that he be
shot -+ I ordered for him to be shot. and a few verbs which do not have a
subjunctive object have a subjunctive-like form which may be a variant of it:
He saw it go, He watched it go, He made it go, Het let it go. Finally, there are
a few verbs whose argument sentence has a unique reduction in form. They
prevented his going, The prevented him from going; and so for prohibit. We
cannot say that the fuller form is from They prevented him from his going
because there is no They prevented him (except as zeroed from They prevented
him from doing something). All these object-forms are variant forms of a
single sentence as object.
However there are in addition certain complicated objects ('complements') which have the property that their first part, noun or nominalized

430

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

sentence, is one which can occur independently as object of the given operator: e.g. I command him to go (not I commandfor him to go) by the side of I
command him; This protects the equipment from breaking by the side of This
protects the equipment; I set the mechanism (to) going by the side of I set the
mechanism; He caught the children stealing by the side of He caught the
children. This condition is not met by the single-sentence variant forms
above, where one could say Reading makes time fly but not Reading makes
time, and I know vacuum to be irrelevant here but not I know vacuum. It is
therefore possible to analyze the latter, complicated, objects as being two
arguments, a noun or nominalized sentence plus a sentence whose subject is
that noun: I command him that he go, This protects the equipment from the
equipment's breaking, and so on. The operators are thus Onno' This does not
mean that we have a restriction on the arguments, with the subject of the 0
required to be the same as the preceding N object. The 0 argument can be
independent of the N argument which precedes it: I command him that the
lawn be cleared, This protects the equipment from people's making mistakes.
Only then there is no zeroing.
As in the case of the noun-phrase, the verb-phrase, which consists first of
all of an operator with its objects which may themselves be sentences (operators with their arguments), can be extended by modifiers derived from
secondary sentences, via relative clauses. With the zeroing of which is, these
modifiers become adverbs of the verb, adverbs of the sentence, and subordinate clauses. Some of the reasons for deriving these from relative clauses
on the verb or sentence, and some of the nesting and other properties of
these modifiers which follow from this derivation, have been mentioned in
the discussion of word classes.
The entry theory has no provision for subsets of operators, other than by
their argument domains. Such subsets as exist in the grammar are due to
conventions of likelihood-based reductions. For example, the reciprocal
verbs are simply those verbs after which each other is zeroable. It is not the
each other that is special: For all verbs in which some of the words that occur
in subject position can also occur in object position, the pronoun each other
can arise: John saw Mary and Mary saw John -+ John and Mary saw each
other. For some of these verbs, given Nl VN2 the likelihood, or implicitness,
of a following and N2 VN1 is exceptionally great: John met mary and Mary
met John -+ John and Mary met each other, and so forfought, conversed, etc.
Under just these the each other is zeroable, yielding John and Mary met.
Some of these verbs also occur as intransitives, with only one argument; in
which case an ambiguity can arise: John and Mary fought can be zeroed from
John and Mary fought each other, but also differently zeroed from John
fought and Mary fought.

OPERATOR GRAMMAR OF ENGLISH

431

5. Question, imperative, negation

These three are altered sentence forms which present varied and peculiar
difficulties for grammatical description. In the present theory they are obtained, in two different ways, from metalinguistic operators on the sentence.
First, every question sentence can be obtained by established types of
zeroing from a disjunction of sentences which cover the domain of possible
answers: Will he leave, or stay? +- Will he leave or will he stay? And Will he
leave?+- Will he leave, or not? +- Will he leave or will he not leave? That the
answers are really selections from among the disjuncts can be seen in the
following example: If one person asks a second Did you close the door? and
the second thereupon closes the door and then answers yes (or: Yes, I did,
Yes, I closed it, etc.), then the second has not answered truthfully, But if after
his belatedly closing the door he merely says I closed the door he speaks
truthfully, if with some dissembling. It follows that yes does not merely
repeat (or agree with) the words of the question, but is a referential to it,
containing the -ed of the question as obtained from before my asking this,
not simply containing a new occurrence of -ed on close.
Secondly, the disjunctions in question is an argument of ask whether,
wonder whether, etc.: He wondered whether she would go or not, He wondered: Would she go, or not? When we bring in the ask, whether, we see that
the wh questions too can be analyzed as disjunctions: I ask whether Nl will
go or ... or N m will go -+ I ask whether Nt or ... or N m will go -+ I ask who
will go -+ I ask: Who will go? -+ Who will go, I ask. -+ Who will go? The set
Nl' ... , N m covers the possible answers either by a list if available, or by indefinite pronouns over the domain (e.g. one or another or yet some other).
Once the whether is replaced by interrogative intonation, the higher operator becomes available for zeroing. The zeroing applies not to wonder, or to
John asks or to I asked but only to I ask (you), which has the informationally unique property of being performative. In this way, all the question
forms are found to be grammatically similar, and to be derived from assertions - but assertions which pose a disjunction over the possible answers.6
In a parallel way the imperative form is obtained from an assertion: 1
request (of you) that you please stay -+ I request (of you): Please stay! -+
Please stay!
Negation presents various difficulties to grammatical regularity. The difficult forms can be obtained if we derive not in a sentence from a metalinguistic I deny (without the argumentative nuance of deny) on that sentence, much as interrogative intonation is obtained from I ask:
I deny he will go
-+ I say he will not go
-+ He will not go, I say
-+ He will not go

432

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

Whereas the interrogative intonation is placed over the whole first disjunct
in the object of I ask, the not is placed in modem English before the operator
in the object of I deny: e.g. He will not go, He is not in. This derivation
explains why not, like and, or, question, and imperative, does not impose an
argument-indicator on its sentence. It also avoids our having assertions
about the null set: in Nothing happened - I deny something happened we
don't have an assertion about nothing but a denial about something. It
further avoids deriving a sentence from an assertion made and then retracted: No man came is not from * A man came; the same man was none but
from I deny a man came.
Different placings and problematic occurrences of not are due to the
denial being on different components of the sentence. Thus Not fully tested
material is dangerous is from Something is dangerous; the same something is
material; I deny the material isfully tested. And He didn't arrive at 3 is from I
deny on He arrived; his arrival was at 3, while He didn't arrive until 3 is from I
deny he arrived -.. I say he did not arrive -.. He did not arrive to which is
connected a secondary His not arriving lasted until 3. The peculiarities of
negation in respect to quantifiers stem in large part from the comma-less
appositional status of quantifiers. Thus All patients are not alike can be
obtained from I deny all are alike; the same all are patients, while Not all
patients are alike is from Some (things) are alike: I deny the same things are
all patients.
They utility of deriving not from deny is seen, for example, in the use of any,
ever. When these words occur without negative or primitive words they mean
roughly 'each', 'at each time', 'each choice of: He is willing to talk to anyone
parallel to He is willing in each case to talk to someone; He is ever helpful.
Their apparent negative meaning arises when they are modifiers on verbs
like regret, fail or on deny: if for each case one denies something then that
something is available in no case. Thus I deny for each case that he talked to a
person -.. He did not,for each case, talk to a person -.. He did not talk to any
person. The various uses of any, ever are obtained from a single word for
each, with a single meaning, differing only by its point of entry, i.e. by the
sentence component on which it acts.
6. Passive and other permutations

Various transformations which contain apparent permutations tum out to
be the products of processes other than permutation. In the case of the
passive the English analysis, which may differ from that for some other
languages, is indicated in Grammar on Mathematical Principles (Paper 15 of
the present volume) § 5, end.
The syntactic status of the -en/-ed as a reduced operator (state) is seen in
cases where it has it own modifiers. Thus the freshly isolated heart does not

OPERATOR GRAMMAR OF ENGLISH

433

come from Someone freshly isolated the heart, sincefreshly is not used as an
adverb on to isolate. Rather, it comes from The heart is freshly in a state of
the isolating of it by someone.
Different evidence comes from the fact that the likelihood of making a
passive for particular words depends on the likelihood of having an operator
such as state. Thus from He left his wife one can have the passive His wife
was left by him .- His wife was in a state of the leaving of her by him. But from
He left the United States it is far less likely to say The United States was left
by him, because there is no recognizable state such that the Unitd States
would be in it as a result of this event. However, we can say The United
States has been left by many of its best writers, because this situation is large
enough to be viewed as a state of the country. This analysis also explains the
unlikelihood of a passive for the dog stopped its barking, and the like.
A different kind of apparent permutation is presented by sentence forms
such as in A brick is what cracked the glass, The glass is what the brick
cracked, What cracked the glass was a brick, etc. Conveniently, these have
parallel forms A brick is that which cracked the glass, That which cracked the
glass was a brick. Here a two-sentence source is clear:
A brick is that; that cracked the glass
-+ A brick is that which cracked the glass
-+ A brick is what cracked the glass
That was a brick; that cracked the glass
-+ That which cracked the glass was a brick
-+ What cracked the glass was a brick
It is thus not necessary to derive these sentences from permutation and
insertion of is what, etc., but simply from joined sentences containing nonspecific that.

7. Conjunctions

Two conjunctions, and, or, are different from all others in that they do not
impose argument-indicators on their two sentences, and in that they permit
the zeroing of words in the second sentence which are the same as parallel
words in the first. The lack of argument-indicator can be obtained by deriving these words from metalinguistic operators as noted obove.

t I costate that John left, Mary stayed
-+ I say: John left and Mary stayed
-+ John left and Mary stayed, I say
-+ John left and Mary stayed

434

OPERATOR GRAMMAR OF ENGLISH

The and is thus a residue of a particular metalinguistic operator, like the not,
the interrogative intonation, etc. This analysis requires that all occurrences
of and be derivable from and between two sentences, something which is
independently demonstrable. Thus and between two nouns is usually the
result of parallel zeroing: John and Mary left +- John left and Mary left.
Special cases such as the reciprocal are differently derivable from and on two
sentences: John and Mary met +- John and Mary met each other +- John met
Mary and Mary met John. Certain cases of and which do not come from
parallel zeroing have other inter-sentence sources. Thus Gilbert and Sullivan
wrote operettas should not be derived from Gilbert wrote operettas and Sullivan wrote operettas (differently from Mozart and Beethoven wrote operas).
But it can be derived from The team of Gilbert and Sullivan wrote operettas
+- A team wrote operettas; the team includes Gilbert and the team includes
Sullivan. Similarly for Sugar and water makes syrup +- A combination makes
syrup; the combination includes sugar and the combination includes water
(note the singular makes whose subject is combination). The zeroing of team,
combination in these environments is a special case of the zeroing of nonspecific nouns such as something, that.
The comparative forms, with their will-known peculiarities, can be most
regularly obtained from a sequence of three sentences separated by semicolons, which have certain expected word-repetitions, and one of which has
more than, less than as operator. For example

t Men read books; the men are more than (other) men; the
( other) men write books
~Men read books, who are more than (other) men who write
books
~ More men read books than write them
The expected word-repetition leads to a required zeroing of the object of
more than: in this case (other) men who.

t Men read books; the books are more than (other) books; women
read the (other) books
~ Men read more books than (other) books, which women read
~ Men read more books than women read
When what is compared is degree of an operator (adjective, verb), rather
than an argument (noun), the source includes degree or amount, since the
operator would not be a direct argument of more than:

OPERATOR GRAMMAR OF ENGLISH

435

t Men are tall to a degree; the degree is more than another degree;
women are tall to the other degree
--+ Men are tall to a degree which is more than the degree to which
women are tall
--+ Men are taller than women (are)

Here the required zeroing is on the second tall; and to a degree which is and
the degree to which are zeroed as being special cases of that which is, this
special case being unique to the more than, less than sentence sequence.
If the more than sentence is first of the three, no special zeroings arise:
Some are more than others; some are men; the men read books;
others are men; the men write books
--+ Some, who are men who read books, are more than others, who
are men who write them
--+ Men who read books are more than those who write them

A companion form is
There are more men who read books than (who) write them.
NOTES

t is used here for very unlikely, but not explicitly ungrammatical, sentential word combinations. Compare section 6 of Paper 15. * is used for forms that violate entry and reduction rules.
A -+ B is used specifically for 'A reduces to B'.
3 In addition to reductions, languages may have morphophonemic variants unrelated to likelihood.
4 More detail is given in the writer's Grammar of English on Mathematical Principles, New
York, Wiley and Sons, 1981; also Papers 12-15 of the present volume.
s See 11.4 below. Details in the writer's Notes du cours de syntaxe (Maurice Gross, ed.), Editions du Seuil, Paris 1976, pp. 158-181.
6 See the writer's The Interrogative in a Syntactic Framework', H. Hi:i: (ed.), Questions, D.
Reidel Pub!. Co., Dordrecht, Holland, 1978, pp. 1-35.
2

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

a 164
abberant
- detail 241
- form 262
- material 275
-able 209
acceptability 240,241,256,270,272,278,349; see also degree of acceptability; ordering
of acceptability; partial ordering of acceptability
- difference 276
low- 272
natural- 148, 153
- order 276
- ordering 242,258,296,297,298,300,301,302, 341, 345
ordering of - 334
- ordering preserved 249,276; see also preserve acceptability ordering
relative - 153
type of - 153
varying - 247
weakened - 244
acceptable 230,244,301,306; see also partially acceptable
- sentence 260,294
accusa tive 249
active 18, 130; see also relation between active verb and passive verb
- -passive relation 19, 20
- 'to passive 22
address 329, 330, 334, 341
addressee-object 103
adjective 13, 22, 38, 39, 40, 213, 264, 286, 295, 302, 318,414; see also deverbal adjective;
partitive adjective; pro-adjective; succession of adjectives, A
- of manner 341
- phrase 150, 164, 174
adjectivization 259,338
adjectivizer 40
adjectivizing
- constant 337
adjoinable interval 139
adjunct 219,236,244,246,249,250,251,253,257,264,272,302, 311, 324, 325, 342,
343,344; see also noun adjunct; right adjunct, sentence adjunct, verb adjunct
- string 236
adjunction 239
adverb 213, 214, 215, 220, 232, 254, 324, 378, 398; see also comparative adverb; locational adverb; prepositional adverb, time adverb, time-location adverb, Aly, D
- of degree 215,220,302,323
- of fact 394
- of manner 215,220,222,246,253,303,318, 341; see also predicate of manner
- of sentence 430
- of verb 430

437

438

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

ad ver bial insert 247, 251
affix 24,26, 27,53,55,59,93,98,151,233,256,258,296,336,337, 368, 370, 373,
394, 413; see also local morphological affix; nominalizing affix; personal affix;
sex affix; zero affix
interrelated - 259
paradigmatic - 151
affixation 365
after 305ff, 425, 426
afterwards 304,305,317,318
agreement 36, 38, 43, 68, 77, 82, 146, 239, 244, 278, 314, 336, 344; see also grammatical agreement; morphemes, agreeing
algebra of transformations 495
Algonquian 99
algorithm 295

aU 52,55,321,323
allophonic values 70
alternant(s) 25, 25, 26, 37, 89, 93, 96, 99; see also complementary alternants; difference
between alternants; morpheme alternants; positional alternants; restricted alternants; unique alternants; zero alternants
- form 156
morpholexical - 24
neighboring - 29
- of morpheme 10, 11
overspecialized - 34
- pairs 99
- with different positions 103
alternation 23, 72; see also regular alternation
alternative
- analysis 234
- distributional analysis 20
- formulation 80,216
- order 187,188
- possibilities 35
- segmentation 92
- sources 295
ambiguous 208, 267, 278, 329, 336; see also dictionary ambiguity; grammatical ambiguity;
local ambiguity; unresolved ambiguity; vocabulary ambiguity
analogic
- extension 222,224,230,232
- operation 223,229,233
- rule 270
- trend 235
analogy 231,272
analysis; see constituent analysis; descriptive analysis; discourse analysis, distributional
analysis; formal analysis; grammatical analysis; linguistic analysis; meaning analysis; morphemic analysis; morphological analysis; morphophonemic analysis;
string analysis; syntactic analysis; transformational analysis; unique analysis
and 221,231,250,294,295,296,325,326,333,335,336,337, 338, 342, 377, 387,418,
424,433
answer 18
antecedent 162, 163, 165, 166, 167, 172, 174, 176, 178, 184,206,226,227,266,279;
see also historical antecedent
antonym 279

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

439

any 28
apposition 180, 182, 280
appositional status 432
appropriate
- verb 279,283; see also V appropriate
- verb-operator 283
- word 230,261, 262
Arabic 50
argument 278,295,297,302,305,317,318,321,326,327,328, 330,333, 334, 335, 336,
338, 340, 346, 347,350, 354, chs 14-16; see also elementary argument; extended
domain of argument; extension of argument; fixed argument; primitive argument;
relation of operator to argument; sequence of arguments
- -demand 357-9
expected - 340
- -indicator chs 14-16
of argument 348, 350
of passive 256
requirement 355,364,403
skipping 341
status 341
variable 332
- word 296
article 38,39,46,51,240; see also definite article, indefinite article, T
as . .. as 314
ask 369
aspect 426
aspectual 246
anmtion 62,164,186,213,267
assimilation 31
associative 196, 334
asyntactic 280; see also resultant, asyntactic; transformation, asyntactic
- operation 232,235,246
automatic
- be 316
- change 314,317
- feature 286
- the 308, 323
- variants 321,327
auxiliary 160, 161, 166, 167, 169, 170, 172, 175, 205, 209, 238, 246, 266, 273, 321,
370,427
axiomatic
- sentence forms 257
- transformational divisors 270

Bantu 39
base 345; see also verb base
final- 346
- form 33
- sentence 379,381
- set 196
- unrestricted 346
battery of transformations 351

440

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

be 51,162,186,213,220,234,245,257,263,264,273,295, 302, 335; see also automatic
be ; morphophonemic be
be-en 187
before 305ff, 425, 426
be-ing 172,187,209,216,218,247, 30lf, 306, 335, 350
be-set 273
binary
- operation 334
- transformation 221,249,255,258,278,281,282
- verb 254,278
bi-unique correspondence 98
Bloomfield, Leonard 13, 236
borrowing 9,388
bound
- pro-morpheme 162,164, 172,176,178,189,206,208
- zero pro-morpheme 166
boundary 201; see also morpheme boundary; sentence boundary; word boundary
but 250,399
by 22,188,192,208,259,272,337

can 161,172,215,382-3
carrier 166; see also phonemic carrier
case 38,43,72
-ending 75,354,424
categorial grammar 352
category (-ies) 213,234,270; see also extended category
- of perception 21
- of words 241; see also word category
- sequence 214
causative 51, 249
center 239, 246
- and-adjunct 237
- string 236, 342f
central meaning 8
chain of equivalences 113, 119, 139
chain property 234
change see automatic change; string relation, changed; coordinated occurrence of change;
cultural change; elementary change; historical change; linguistic change; meaning
change; morphophonemic change; ordered change; paraphrastic change; sentence
change; sound change; string change; vowel change
characteristic intonation 264
Cherokee 9
circumlocution 20
class 3,15,30,34,38,43,61,62,93,112,121,126,145, 296, 350; see also distributional
class; environmental class; equivalence class; form class; grammatical class; morphological class; morpheme class; person class; sequence of classes; SUbstitution
class; word class
- construction 151, 171
- environment 145
- marks 334
- meaning 40
- of elements 16
- of positions 37

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

441

(class)
- of predicates 332
- of schema 275
- order 127
- prefix 39ff
- repeated - 127
- structure term 162
- variable 338
classification 68,275,321,336
linguis tic - 241
- of experience 22
- of meaning 8
- of morphemes 336; see also morphological classification
classificatory linguistics 143
classificatory morpheme 333
classifier 248,279,280,318,335; see also Ncl
- morpheme 339
- -noun 246,262
- relation 275
classifiers of morphemes 42
clause 39; see also coordinate clause; relative clause; subordinate clause
- suffix 60
collective
- noun 214,326
- verb 325
colon 417
combinability 299, 323, 348; see also restriction on combinability
combination 7,75,77,93,97,171,174,204,331,339, 346; see also operatorcombination; regularity of combination; sentence combination; unique combination; word
combination
- of elements 294; see also restriction on element combination
- of meanings 204
combiner 197,198,203; see also sentence combiner
combining elements 202
comfortable 297,301,302
comma 158,167,168,177,180,181,221,222,233,250,280
- intonation 165,186
command 25,50
compact
- description 78
- formulation 71
- statement 45, 144
comparative 215, 257, 308ff, 434; see also comparative connective; restricted comparative
- adverb 215,220
- conjunction 215,221,250,251,310
- connective 267
- marker 255,312
- morpheme 308
compared word 312
competing theories 238
complement 24; see also verb complement
- set 241

442

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

complementary
- alternates 14
- distribution 26
- environments 94,201,294
- forms 314
- morphemes 34,36,38,46,86,95,96,97,99
- stems 104
- transformations 209
- variants 299,300, 315, 327
complex structure 17 3ff;
component 16, 81, 212; see also long component
- divisor transformation 260
- morpheme 104
morphemic - 75, 77, 92, 93
- sentence 282,283,286,287,288
- sentences are simpler 203
- sUbconstruction 201
- tr.ansformation 212
composition rule 258
compound
- noun 22,255,262
- stress 370, 393,421
- tense 305
- word 151,199
computability 322,338
computation 345
- of transformational decomposition 278
concatenation 196,200,350,405
concord 46,50,51,64,68,424
concrete noun 258
conjoin 325
conjoined sentence 169, 181, 182, 227, 246, 322
conjugation 314
conjunction 53,59,165,169,176,180,181,182,184,189,220,257, 261,267,279,281,
283, 284, 290, 304, 305, 308ff, 339, 433f; see also comparative conjunction;
coordinate conjunction; coordinating conjunction; subordinate conjunction;
subordinating conjunction; time conjunction; time-order conjunction; wh-conjunction; C
conjunctional
- preposition 254
- transform 334
- transformation 249
- verb 286
- words 415
connected
- discourse 8, 18
- speech 107
connective 212, 215, 232, 242, 254, 259, 261, 267; see also comparative connective,
coordinate connective, inverse of connective, time connective, wh-connective
- verb 249,283,307
connector 164
constant 211,228,229,238,240,243,244,252,258,259,260,263, 270, 278, 301, 310,
334, 336, 337,338,343,344,345; see also morphophonemic constant

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

443

(constant)
choice of - 337
dropping of.,.. 264
constituent 21,164,176,181,186, 207;seealso immediate constituent
- analysis 143,201,205,237,239
constructional equivalence 146
constructional relation 168,186
- status 145,146,147,156,157,169,171,179,182,207,209
contour 16
contraction 31
contrast 96,314
contrastive
- environment 299
- stress 173, 179, 180, 186
co-occurrence 17, 143ff, 152f, 199,204,215,230,233,239,276,277,301,320,327,
338; see also fixed co-occurrence; individual co-occurrence; restricted co-occurrence; restriction of co-occurrence; word co-occurrence
changeable restriction on - 338
- domain 201
- equivalences 207
observed - 204
- range 146, 152, 163, 167, 168, 169, 170, 172, 175, 181, 182,206,207,208;
see also restriction of co-occurrence range
- relation 174, 185
- restriction 158, 193,232,259
co-occurrent 15, 144, 145ff, 162, 201, 262; see also diagnostic co-occurrent; range of cooccurrents; selection of co-occurrent
sum of- 3
testing - 152f
coordinate
- clause 174
- conjunction 186,221,250,255,257
- connective 267
coordinated occurrence of changes 211
coordinating
- conjunction 208
coordinations 58
core of language 346
corpus 19
correspondence set 6
corresponding
- constructional position 179, 182
- differences 48
- position 312
- string position 254
cost of alternative description 330, 339
count noun 424
critique of text 107, 135, see also text critique
cross reference 123, 124, 167, 361
cross-referencing system 387
cross-referential pronoun 368
cultural
- change 301

444

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

(cultural)
- context 306
culture 108, 140
- and language 108,109
data 6, 18, 204; see also reduction of date
dative 38
- verb 213
decision procedure 407
declaritive 379
decoding 339
decomposition 236, 258, 281, 330; see also nonunique decomposition; sentence decomposition, transformational decomposition
- of sentence 237, 281
- of transformations 244
decompositional direction 287
decompositional path 281
definite article 278,422
definitional operator 379
deformation 218,219,220,221,248,249,259,260,261
deformed
- second sentence 251
- sentence 248,278
degeneracy 338f, 340, 345; see also transformational degeracy
degerate transformation 298
degree 310
degree
- of acceptability 258
- of dependence 16
- of freedom 226
- of independence 12,13
deictic pronouns 368
Delaware 89,103
deletion 246
demonstrative 40,41
pronoun 407
dependence 17,20,44,104,125,155,210,259,294, 295, 317;se~also degree of
dependence; occurrence-dependence; tense dependencies; time dependence;
time-location dependence
removal of - 199
selectional - 303
serial - 16
dependent; see also dependent morpheme
- element 42, 124, 154
- form 126
- indistribution 103
- occurrence 123
- order changes 209
derivation 4,231, 235, 270, 272, 273, 275, 283, 301,312,320,324,325,326,344,347;
see also descriptive derivation; historical derivation
direction of - 274
- rule 260,261,269

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

445

derived; see also morphologically derived; transformationally derived
- form 313
- sen tence 258
descriptive
- advantage 44, 92
- analysis 13, 330
- derivation 232
- effiency 42
- linguistics 47, 107, 108, 109, 110,111,112,113,115,120,121,122,123,140,
200,201,236,339
deverbal adjective 302
diagnostic
- co-occurrent 144
- position 49
dialect 4, 111
dictionary 33,62, 112;seealso lexicon
- ambiguity 278
- meaning 262, 278
- of morphemes 336
- paraphrase 348
difference; see also corresponding difference; distributional difference; sentence difference
- between alternants 27, 34
- -counting 227
- in linguistic distribution 134
- in meaning 15, 134, 294
- iu selection 15
- of meaning correlates with difference of distribution 14
differentiation 258
discontinuous
- element 239
- matching introducer 207
- morpheme 13,37,76,77,82,85,90,91,154,156,158,163,170,180,205
- morphemic entity 229
- parts 41
- repitition 206
- vowel 81
discourse 15, 295, 326, 330,334; see also connected discourse; metadiscourse; scientific
discourse
- analysis 107ff
- structure 326
disjunction 207,215,261,265,267,268,279,280,284,430,431
- -zeroing 268
distinguished positions 261, 266
distribution 3, 12,26,34, 36,42,48,61,68,75, 78, 84, 88, 113, 117,332; see also
differences in limitations of distribution; linguistic distribution; phonemic distribution; regular distribution; restricted distribution; special distribution
combined - 26
complete - 67
complex relative - 104
identical - 113
- of elements 4, 299
- of equivalence classes 122
relative - of elemen ts 109

446

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

(distribution)
- within sentence 116
distributional; see also alternative distributional analysis
- analysis 15,20,109
- basis 250
- characteristic 20
- class 3,81, 113
- difference 48
- fact 5
- inverse 134
- investigation 15
- linguistics 300
- method 110
- regularity 12, 18, 20
- relation 10,13,17,18,19,71,104,112,135,138
- relations as perceived 7
- statement 79,104,111
- structure 3, 5, 7
- structure of language 9
divisor 260,261,271,278
do 160,161,166,172,234,264,428
domain 17,40, 124, 149,252,257,278,298,300,301,306,314,315,317,322,323,
335, 347, 350; see also co-occurence domain; extended domain; operand
domain; reduction of domain; restricted domain; subset of domain; syntactic
domain
- of construction 156
- of major restrictions of co-occurrence 199,312
- of transformation ISO, 256
- -restriction 298,301,304,348
double array 116,117,121,134,135,136,138
durative modifiers 421
durative operator 411
durativity 418

each 279
each other 123,124,255,263,319,347
echo words 28
economy 103
~d 161,166,172,431
element 15, 16, 17,19,34,45,46,49,55,61,174, 294; see also combination of elements;
combining elements; discontinuous element; distribution of elements; element of
meaning; independent elements; language elements; morphemic elements; new
element; pronominal elements; relations among elements; relative occurrence of
elements; restriction on element combination; syntactic element
irreducible - 5
elementary argument 354
elementary change 195
elementary operation 211, 212, 237, 260; see also succession of elementary operations;
theory of elementary operations
elementary operators 404
elementary sentence 197, 209, 233, 236, 237, 244, 254, 255, 318,332; see also set of
elementary sentences

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

447

(elementary sen tence)
- form 232, 244, 246, 255
- structure 211
elementary transformation 194,195,202,255
eliciting 19,20,152,162
emphasis 69
emphatic 161
- stress 160, 172, 214
empty positions 174
endocentric 64
English 24,33,46,50,63,64,67, 198, 244, 333ff; see also subset of English
entry chs 14-16; see also ordered entry of words; word entry
entry relation ch 13,403,405,407
environing condition 10
environment 9,17,25,26,28,29,30,31,32,33,38,41,44,47,48,49,61, 74, 90, 91,
94,96,118, 120, 134, 139, 144, 145, 171, 172, 203, 212, 236, 314, 315, 318,
320, 323, 327, 330, 332, 339, 347; see also class environment; contrastive environment; equivalent environment; identical environment; operator environment
range of environment; selected environment; sentence environment; syntactic
environment; textual environment; unique environment
amount of difference in - 14
combined - 26, 34
complementary - 94,201,294
determining - 319,320
distinctive - 180
matched - 134
relevant - 68
environmental
- basis of morphemic definition 96
- class 49
- regularity 10
- restriction 299
equation 50, 54ff, 84, 85, 101
equivalence see also constructional equivalence; grammatical equivalence; semantically
determined equivalence; transformational equivalence
- class 114, 115, 117, 118, 120, 126, 127; see also distribution of equivalence classes;
occurrence of equivalence classes; relation between equivalence classes
- class recur 117
- of morpheme sequences 78,84
- relation 201,211,276,277,296
equivalent; see also transformational equivalent; transformationally equivalent; semantically
equivalent
- environment 113, 114,115
- sentence-form 128
Eskimo 71, 103
every 279
except 399
excision 231
- of wh-is 272, 273
exclamatory intonation 209
exocentric 64
expanded form 302
expectability 341

448

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

experience; see classification of experience
extended category 224
extended domain 256
- of argument 255
extending substitution 45
extending transformational relation 243,271
extension: see also transformational extension
- of argument 252,270
- of morpho phonemics 11,294,339
- of selection 301
- of set of sentences 331
- of substitution classes 49
- of transformational analysis 296
extraction 243, 246, 269, 270
factorization 197
fairy-tales 404
feminine 39,46
first operand 342
fixed
- argument 296
- co-occurrence 147
for 169,191,192,218,219
for ... to 225
form class 70
formal
- analysis 111
- procedure 107
- regularity 13
- restriction 13
formation-rules 295
formula 45, 63f, 114, 334
frame of substitution 50, 51; see also selected environment
free
- pro-morpheme 163, 164, 165,176, 192
- pronoun 206, 210
- variant 14, 16,90,201, 299, 300, 301, 302, 303, 306ff, 312, 314, 315, 318,326,
331, 339, 348, 349; see also paraphrastic free variant; unrestricted free variant
- variation 298,299
French 35, 36
frequency 67
future tense 305ff,427
gender 38,43,314,424
generate
- language 202
- sentences 19,201,276
- utterance 18
gesture 20
Goldstein, Kurt 9
grammar 12, 18, 23, 24, 33,45,68, 112, 141, 197,200, 201, 233, 276, 283, 321, 325,
330, 346; see also categorial grammar; kernel grammar; metagrammar; regular
grammar; subgrammar; sublanguage grammar; transformational grammar

INDEX OF SUBJECTS
(grammar)
fmite - 389
generative - 276
- of language 294
- of whole language 332,342
overt - 342
simpler - 160
styles of - 236
traditional - 236
grammatical
- agreement 13,76,90
- ambiguity 239,258,278,295,296, 380
- analysis 236,239, 259
- character 319
- class 6
- construction 322
- description 335
- equivalence 110, 136, 140
- innovation 21
- meaning 65, 343
- process 236
- property 332
- reduction 326
- relation 131,132,147,156,173,183,268,347
- restriction 301,306,320,321,338
- rule 301
- statement 300
- status 149, 200
- structure 23, 26, 296
- subclass 18
- subset 342
- system 294
- transformation 111, 127ff, 135
Greek 24,28,31,37,38

hove 51,162
hove-en 172,187,209,216,247
he 163,164,172,206
head 64,146,150,169,183,190,236,250,257,261,270,275
- of construction 20
hearer 294, 339, 340, 341
Hebrew 24,28,30,32,33,39,46
Hidatsa 25,59,67
hierarchial operation 275
hierarchial subdivision 236,237
historical
- accident 340
- antecedent 205
- change 8
- derivation 4
- descriptive interrelations 21
- regularity 21
- restatement 6

449

450

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

history 3,347
homonym 23,35,46, 188
homonymity 8,15, 156, 183, 184, 192,205,208,349; see also homonymy
homonymous
- morphemes 11,349
- sentence 199,209,258
homonymy 68,190,197; see also homonymity
-hood 413
-ich 157,163
identical environment 14,34,112, 115;see also identical string of words
identity transformation 196, 209
idiom 232,268,275
idiomatic meaning 204
idiomatic specialization 388
if 248f
imbedding 164,177
immediate constituent 62,69, 133, 160,204,236,275
imperative 91,93,95,98,99, 103,232,245,264,265,279,325,430-2
imperfective 305,351
incomplete paradigm 93
increment 212, 216, 219, 220, 222,227,229,232,234,246,252,255,277,278,297,
300,302,303,304,317,321,324,327,329,330,332,346, 347, 351; see also
non-sentential increment; restricted increment; source increment; unrestricted
increment
- combination 330
non-sentential - 246
- structure 214
incremental
- operation 277,326
- operator 300
- transformation 297; see also unrestricted incremental transformation
- unary 249
indefinite; see also indefinite article
- noun 393,396
- object 268
- plural pronoun 315
- pronoun 201,208,230,274,284; see also zeroing of indefinite pronoun
- quantifier 323
independent; see also degree of independence
- element 122,123,198,294,316
- morpheme 53,59,335
- sentence 173,177,185,187
- subject 271
- transformation 224
- variable 346,350
- verb 103
- word 296
indirect object 337
individual co-occurrence 147,156,157,162,171,173,204,205
individual morpheme 111, 194, 240
inflectional suffix 30

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

451

informant 129,152,205
- response 12
information 200, 210,295,296,322; see also language information; objective information;
objective-subjective information; subjective information, substantive information,
sufficient and necessary for informa tion
- bearing 294
- burden 296
- content 150,258
- difference 294
- loss 262,264, 267
necessary and sufficient for - 296
- of sentence 352
- processing structure 348
- processing system 348
- represented by morpheme 331, 348
informationless operator 265
-ing 191,211,212,248,254,259,302,335, 337;seealso be-ing; Ving
in-order to 169
insert 221, 222, 226, 227, 234, 244, 246, 251, 255, 257, 261,262,263,278; see also
adverbial insert; sentence insert; wh-insert
- -form 234,266,267,268,280
- -like 270
insertion 212,214,220,225,255
instrumental 99, 100, 244, 295
- prefix 59
interpretation 294,296,330,332,334,337,342,343,347; see also semantic interpretation; semantic interpretation of syntax
interrogative 82, 393
interrogative intonation 431
interval 120,121,122,124,125,126,127,135
intonation 36, 50, 53, 59, 63,68,69,178,179,185,186,325,365,368,417; see also
characteristic intonation; comma intonation, exclamatory intonation; interrogative intonation; period intonation; question intonation; quote intonation;
sentence intonation
intonationally marked 245
introducer 176, 179, 187, 188, 198, 203, 209; see also sentence introducer
of sentences 133
matched - 176,177,179,180,186,189
inverse 195,224,230,232,271,273,278, 339;seealso distributional inverse
- of connective 264
- of operation 264
- operation 230
- transformation 270
is 254,271
is + ing 170
is to 273
it 213,253
jocular 363
jocularity 243
joke
linguistic - 233
juncture 30,63,72, 103; see also morphemic juncture; morphophonemic juncture

452

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

kernel 197,201,209, 212ff, 229, 239, 257,332:seealso nominalized kernel; recursion of
kernel structure
- construction 198
- grammar 200
- sentence 197,199,200,209,258,259,333,372
- well-formedness 258
kernel-like 231; see also K -like
Kota 28,33
language 8, 332; see also logistic language; meta language; object language; sign language;
structure of language; sublanguage; subject matter language; theory of language
- as tool 13
- determines perception 21
- elements 346
- fixes recall 22
human - 348
- information 330
- occurrence 109
- relation to meaning 8
- structure 21,65,199,202
- structures, comparability of 65
systems of - 347
Latin 46
lattice 232
least upper bound 281
less than 434
level(s) 65; see also morphological levels
- of consistency 236
lexicon 336; see also dictionary
likelihood ch 13; see also zero likelihood
likelihood gradations 358
likelihood-inequalities ch 13
limitations
- of distribution 88, 98
- of selection 46f, 60, 62, 70
- upon the use of morphemes 348
linearly ordered 295, 334, 348
linguistic; see also joke linguistic
- analysis 330
- change 270
- structure 34, 143ff, 194, 200,202,241
linguistics 68, 237; see also classificatory linguistics; descriptive linguistics; distributional
linguistics; structural linguistics; transformational linguistics
list 6,28,32,35,46,62,67,70,94,96,99,112,152,165,187, 212,214,237,319,320,
339; see also transformation list
local
- ambiguity 341
- check 246,257
- morphological affixes 289
- semantic similarity 279
- synonymity 261,262, 278

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

453

locational adverb 213
logic 9,22
logical
- forms of grammar 240
- operations 379
logistic languages 21
long
- component 17, 82
- morpheme 190,208
-Iy 220,303,413

11IIlde75
11IIlke 337

many-one transformation 192
mark 34,74,98,99,209,336,337; see also class marks
marked 33; see also intonationally marked
mass-noun 315
matched; see also introducer, matched
- sentences 179,180,181,185,207
mathematical
- characterization 339
- method 21
- search 5
mathematics 9, 21

11IIlY 266,382
meaning 3,12,13,14,16,23,25,26,34,37,40,41,42,46,51,65,66, 67, 71, 75, 96,
107, 108, 112, 115, 119, 120, 123, 127, 139, 149, 168, 184, 186, 189, 191,
194, 202, 204, 205, 208, 243, 267, 273, 284, 296, 301, 306, 331, 338, 341,
342, 344, 345, 346, 347, 380; see also central meaning, class meaning; classification of meaning; combination of meanings; dictionary meaning; difference
in meaning; grammatical meaning; idiomatic meaning; morphemes and
meaning; objective meaning; range of meaning; restricted meaning; structure of
meaning
amount of - difference 14
- analysis 98
- and distribution 12
- carrying operations 265
- change 203
- difference 13
element of - 13
- in human activity 8
intended - 281
- masculine 36
- of classes 40
quantative - 246
- range 8, 260, 266
- structure 8
single - 10, 11
- unit 11
meaningful expression 340
meaningless 70

454

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

measure 253,277,278
- selections 4
Menomimi 30,31,33
mention 379
metadiscourse 334
metagrammar 332
metalanguage 275,332,389,390,410,418
metalinguistic 327, 331
- operator 379,387,400,417,431,433
- sentence 300
metaphor 9,232,268,363,404
metasentence 327
metastatement 300
metatextUal operator 360ff, 365, 370, 387
meta theory 347
method 23, 34, 36, 43, 44, 45ff, 62f, 67,68, 107, 109, 110, 111, 114, 119, 134, 163,
164, 236, 294, 298, 327, 348, 349; see also distributional method; syntactic
method; transformational method
middle transformation 244,245,274
minimum utterance 67,70,80,86
model 6, 230, 233
modifier 142, 147, 190, 232, 246,409; see also adjunct; durative modifier; nested modifier;
order of modifiers
essential- 421
more 308ff

more than 434

Moroccan Arabic 47, 65
morpheme 23,25,30, 36ff, 45ff, 62, 63,68,81,82,83,89,94,111,120,194,198,214,
216, 240, 308, 333,339,340,348,349,350,378; see also adjectivizer; classification of morphemes; classificatory morpheme; classifier morpheme; classifier of
morphemes; comparative morpheme, component morpheme; discontinuous
morpheme; dictionary of morphemes; homonymous morphemes; independent
morpheme; individual morpheme; limitations upon the use of morphemes; long
morphemes; order to morphemes; ordered morphemes; pro-morpheme; reconstructed morpheme; relations among morphemes; repeated morpheme; repititive
morpheme; restricted morpheme; sequence of morphemes; subclass of morphemes
relative occurrence morphemes; subset of morphemes; suprasegmental morpheme;
syntactically environing morphemes; un classed morpheme; variant of morpheme;
zero morpheme
agreeing - 42
- alternants 25ff, 71, 82, 94, 103
- boundary 47, 80, 82, 89
- class 41,45,47,48,49,50,63,73,82,100,120,130,200,202, 342, 349; see also
predicate morpheme class; relations among morpheme classes
definition of - 25
dependent- 304,317
- distribution class 61
dropping of - 232,261
initial - 23, 83
interrelations among - 80
medial- 83
minus - 25, 36
pair 23

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

455

(morpheme)
recurring - 1 75
- sequences 45, 49, 59, 100. 102, 299, 355; see also equivalence of morpheme
sequences
single - 45,47,49,94,214
- unit 25
- variant 86
morphemes and meaning 9
morphemic; see also juncture, morphemic
- analysis 11
- elements 189
- order 127
- relation 332
- repetitions 38
- segment 89,94,95,97
- segmentation 12, 90, 92
- shape 335, 340
- unit 38
morpholexical variation 34
morphological; see also local morphological affix
- analysis 211
- boundaries 63
- class 322,323,338
- classification 204
- feature 32
- form 272
- levels 100
- process 78, 79
- regularities 335
- rela tions 63
- restrictions 275
- statement 91
- status 27
- structure 71, 299
morphologically
- derived 258
- simple 322, 323
morphology 12,27,34,94,299,377; see also primitives of morphology
comparability of - 68
morphophoneme 103,300
morphophonemic
- analysis 35
- be 335
- change 331
- constant 334
- juncture 72,81,87
- plural 214
- regularity 10
- relation 10, 86
- requirement 240, 316
- source 315,327, 333; see also unrestricted morphophonemic source
- ·sentence 331
- symbol 24

456

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

(morphophonemic)
- system 297,322,339; see also paraphrastic morphophonemic system
- tense 318,338
- variant 300
- variation 80
- writing 11
- zeroing 212
morphophonemics 6, 34, 244, 278, 315, 324, 332, 336, 340,344,350; see also extension
of morphophonemics; restricted morpho phonemics
- of syntactic sequence 296
multiplication 196
music 21
name 141; see also personal names; semantic name
negation 324,430-2
negative 91,100,370
- sequence 25
neighborhood 163, 166
nested modifiers 378
nesting 336
neutralization 314, 315, 316
new
- element 98
- formation 7, 8, 21, 22
node 281,282
nominalization 186, 188, 197, 225, 230, 259, 286, 335, 338; see also of-nominalization
- of sentence 184,189,258
nominalized
- kernel 217; see also Kn
- secondary sentence 186
- sentence 174,177,185, 188f, 197, 219, 283, 289, 307, 316; see also Sn
- verb 277; see also Vn
nominalizing affix 337
noncontiguity 239
non-elementaryoperators 372; see also non-elementary unary
non-paraphrastic transformation 295
non-predicate
- form 322
non-restrictive relative clause 400,42lf
non-reversible transformation 148
nonsense 297,391,404
non-sentential increment 246
nonunique decomposition 275,284
nonuniqueness 5
non-zeroed word 255
normal
- acceptance 191
- form 258, 259
- word choice 297
normalization of structure 232
normalize sequence of sentences 203
normative rule of grammar 4
not 160,172,209,214,246,278,324,387,418

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

457

noun 13, 38, 39,40,41, 59,92,95,100,213,246,262,268, 295,326, 333,414; see also
classifier noun; collective noun; compound noun; count noun; mass noun; time
noun;N
- -adjunct 321,322,323
human - 279
nonhuman - 162
- phrase 38,40,56,57,58,64,174,418,420,430; see also suffix of noun phrase;
N-phrase
nounce-form 153,233,363
nuance 277,301,341,381,407,410
number 11, 38, 43, 55, 77, 103, 310, 323, 326; see also plural; raised number; raised numbering; singular
numbers 52,259,310
object 11,20,58,64,95,97,98,100,104,164,165,169,170,172, 186,191,192,218,
219, 245, 247, 251,253,257,261, 277,283,326,333,336,337,342,343,344;
see also indefmite object; indirect object; pseudo-object; sentential object; .n
- forms 263
- language 418
- range 168
objective
- grammatical meaning 345
- information 294,295,321,330,334,339,340,373,384
- report 341
- -subjective information 348
obviate person 104

occurred 266

occurrence 23, 74, 349; see also dependent occurrence; rang of occurrence; regularity
of occurrence; relative occurrence; restriction of occurrence; transformation
occurrence
- -dependence 17
- of equivalence classes 117
- of member 4

of 190,248,337

- -nominalization 303,318
omission 146
one 172
one-<lirectional transformation 188,190,197,203,209
one-one relation 8

only 399

operand 223,225,249,253,255,278,296,300,316, 317f, 330, 343,344, 350; see also
first operand; operator-operand relation; primitive operand; second operand;
second operand tensing
- domain 326
- interchange 306,311
- of operand 343
- sentence 301,304,305,321,345,346,347
operation 28, 46, 92, 211, 212, 232, 237, 277; see also asyntactic operation; binary operation; elementary operation; inverse of operation; inverse operation; logical operations; meaning-carrying operations; paraphrastic operation; partially ordered
operations; product of operations; redundancy operation; scope of operation;
unary operation; unique operation; zeroing operation
directed - 231

458

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

( operation)
directional - 229
intermediate - 229
- of word selection 211
repeating of - 226
operator 212, 259, 261, 262, 263, 266, 295, 298, 317, 326, 327, 332,335,336,337,
342, 343, 350, chs 14-16; see also deimitional operator; durative operator;
elementary operator; informationless operator; metalinguistic operator; metatextual operator; non-elementary operator; ordered operators; performative
operator; product of operators; relation of operator to argument; sameness
operators; secondary sentence operator; sentence operator; unrestricted operator;
verb operator; zeroable operator
- -argument relation 336,337,338
-combination 322
-environment 325,340
form 295
- indicator 354, chs 14-16
latest - 333, 342
non-elementary - 404
- notation 332, 336
-operand relation 322
or operand environments 348
order 345,347
relation 336, ch 13
sentences 325
- structural information 296
- system 335
- -type 322,331
- on verb 276
- -word 296
optative 245, 325
optimal divisors 260
07250,294, 295,325,326,333,335,336,337,338,342,378,387,418,483
order 3, 55, 59, 64,68, 80, 115, 132, 135, 170,187, 188, 196,225, 289, 297; see also
dependent order changes; morphemic order; operator order; predicate order;
preferred order; reverse order; reversible order; sentence order; time order
- of modifiers 421
- of morphemes 47
- of occurrences 22, 115
- of restrictions 3, 4
- of sentences 116
- of sequence 115
- of symbols 255
- of transformations 289
- of words 289
preferred - 22
- relation 281
ordered 328; see also linearly ordered
- change 345
- entry of words ch 13
- morphemes 337
- n-tuples 250
- operator notation 345

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

459

(ordered)
- operators 347
- pair 219,251
- set of n-tuples 286, 297
- set of statements 5
- transformations 328, 345
- undoing of transformations 345
ordering; see also predicates; ordering of; selection-ordering
- of acceptability 241
- of predicates 324
- of sen tences 11 7
overlap 182,183,185,199
overlapping subclasses 167
pair test 16
parallel
- items 252
- posi tions 313
- repetitions 311
- sentences 185, 186, 189, 197, 208
- substitutability 17
paraphrase 321,330,341,379,381, 385; see also dictionary paraphrase; removal of
transformational paraphrase
pure - 341
paraphrastic 332
- change 303
- free variant 304, 305
- morphophonemic system 294
- opera tion 337
- system 340
- transform 300, 328
- transformation 294, 295, 296, 297, 298, 300, 306ff, 312, 325, 326, 331, 332,
339; see also nonparaphrastic transformation
parenthesis closing 338
partial ordering 256, 296
- of acceptability 335
partial transformation 209
partially
- acceptable 244
- ordered
- acceptability 240, 335
- homomorphisms 276
- operation 348
- transformations 258, 346
particle 73, 82, 100
partition 209, 349
partitive 177
- adjective 180,185,186,210
parts of speech 377
passive 18,130,137,141,143,147,149,168,170,182,183,184, 187, 188, 191, 195,
205, 206, 20~ 233, 243, 244, 245, 252, 255, 256, 259, 26~ 272, 273, 274,
276, 278,401, 432f
- -like 245,286

460

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

(passive)
- subject 170
pad 24,25, 26,29,305ff
pause 63,68
perfect 429
perfective 305ff, 351
perfectivity 308
- restrictions 306
performative 232,368,395,399,431
- operator 264
period 326, 334
- intonation 369
permutation 212,221,243,244,249,250,251,252,254,255,257,264, 277, 278, 279,
280,309,311,338,339,342,432
person 11,72,77,95,96,98,103, 104;seealso obviate person
- class 40,43
personal
- affix 97, 100
- names 276
- prefix 90
phoneme 12, 23, 34, 89, 232, 323, 330, 340, 388; see also zero phoneme
broken sequence of - 36
initial- 41
neighboring - 12
- sequence 11, 23, 25, 36, 46, 334, 338; see also relative occurrence of phoneme
sequences; sequence of phonemes
sequential- 300
zeroing of - 261
phonemic
- carrier 161, 172
- component 25
- composition 9, 299
- of morpheme 81
- difference 23, 299
- distribution 31
- feature 5
- form 46; see also repeated phonemic form
- long component 300
- portions 315
- representation 348, 350
- segment 10
- sequence 24,37,91
- shape 322,339,350,392
- similarity 26,71,94
- solution 5,6
- structure 29,62,67
- writing 62
phonemics 47
phonology 12,299,330
phrase 17, 70; see also noun phrase; verb phrase; N-phrase; V-phrase
- -infix 46
- prefix 119
place 222, 246, 252

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

please 279

461

pleonastic 244,274
plural 24, 26, 31, 36, 39,40,46,56, 76, 90, 92,94,95,96,97,100,104,214,231,232,
234, 259, 263, 283, 284, 299, 315,336; see also morphophonemic plural; number; -s
- suffix 414
portmanteau blends 238
position 3, 32, 37,47,49,51,61,62,67,68,103,162,163,174,214,224, 234, 313,
322, 333,334, 336, 337,338.343.345; see also class of positions; corresponding position; diagnostic position; distinguished positions; empty position; parallel
position; relative position; sentence position; syntactic position
identical - 299
sentential- 299
positional
- altemant 82. 155
- relation 332.336,337,339
- varmnt 34,37,46,72,82,90,91.94.163,196.201,209
positions 28,40,48, 59,65.90, 225. 238, 335
predicate 232, 295,296.321,322,323,325,327.336.337.342; see also class of predicates; ordering of predicates; time predicate
- form 300, 302. 303, 321
- morpheme class 335. 338
non-existent - 322
- of manner 318
ordering of - 324
- source 321
- system 332
system of - 294, 332
- tran~orms 323.324
preferred order 22
prefix 10, 11, 28, 39, 40, 49, 59, 63, 413; see also class prefix. instrumental prefix;
personal prefix; phrase prefix; verb prefix; zero prefix
preposition 39, 52. 213. 295,414; see also conjunctional preposition; P
prepositional adverb 213
present tense 316.412
preserve acceptability-ordering 242.243.306.312,320,324
primary sentence 173.181.182.183.184.185,186,187,191,208,209,221,304
primitive
- argument 328,333,346,347
- operand 333
primitives of morphology 348. 349
primitives of syntax 348, 349; see also syntactic primitives
pro-adjective 284; see also pro-A
procedure 12, 24, 34.49. 54,63,68, 281; see also formal procedure
product 196.212.233,298
- of operations 231
- of operators 334
productive
- quasi-transformation 193
- transformational relation 230,244
productivity 7.21,201,204,229
program for computer 275
progressive 429

462

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

pro-morpheme 162,163,164,165,172,173,174,175,176,177,179,180, 184,185,
186, 192, 206, 207, 209, 264; see also bound pro-morpheme; free pro-morpheme; wh-pro-morpheme
indeterminately bound - 162, 163
post wh - 164f
pronominal element 20
pronominalization 392,408
pronoun 15, 39, 40, 102, 123, 124, 131,143, 162, 163, 168, 176, 190, 192,206, 222,
230, 245, 249, 251, 257, 259, 264, 269, 280,284,295,326, 392; see also crossreferential pronoun; deictic pronoun; demonstrative pronoun; free pronoun;
indefinite pronoun; referential pronoun; pronominal; -s, pro-N
human - 269
pronounable 268
pronouning 361,365
pronounce 6
pronouned 268,312
pronouning 252,267,270,274,280,281
pronunciation 315,330
proof 9,22
pro-verb 166,428; see also pro-V
pro-word 245
- substitution 279
pseudo-object 272
quantified
- word 313
quantifier 198, 214, 284, 312, 313, 321, 323, 423, 432; see also indefinite quantifier;
universal quantifier
quantity 312
quasi-linguistic system 13
quasi-transformation 192,201,209; see also productive quasi-transformation
question 18,36,143,149,172,176,178,179,186,189,207,209,232, 233, 245, 257,
264,267,325,328,430-2
- -answer pair 260
- intonation 160, 164, 172, 173, 394
- marker 186
quotation 191,276
- -form 245
- marks 379
quote 58
- intonation 163
- marker 209
quoted
- material 265
- sentence 209
quotient set 132, 209
raised
- number 54, 70
- numbering 64
- numeral 225
range
- of co-occurrents 163; see also co-occurrence range; object range

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

463

(range)
- of environments 26,28,32,34,139
- of meaning 8, 278
- of occurrence 349
reading, intended 228, 281
correct - 281
reciprocal
- verb 255,263,319,325,326,347,396
reconstructed
- form 207,347
- form environment 261
- morpheme 316,340
- sentence 181
- word 263
recursion of kernel structure 335ff
reduced
- main stress 17 3
- stress 179, 180, 186
reduction 326, chs 13-16; see also grammatical reduction
- of data 346
- of domain 347
redundancy 261,278
- operation 229
- -removal 222,229,261,262,264,266
redundant 212,232; see also zeroing redundant material
reduplication 24,26,27,28,29,31,82
refer 163
- to individual 165
reference 326
individual- 340
referent 253,254
identical - 254
- repeating 267,279
referential
- pronouns 295,415,424
- zeroing 395
regular
- alternation 23
- distribution 16, 93
- grammar 339
regularity 17, 19, 86; see also distributional regularity; environmental regularity; formal
regularity; historical regularity; morphophonemic regularity; syntactic regUlarity
- of combination 19
- of occurrence 4,15,92
regularization 331
regularize text 139
relation 335,337; see also classifier relation; constructional relation; co-occurrence relation;
distributional relation; entry relation; equivalence relation; grammatical relation;
morphemic relation; morphological relation; morphophonemic relation; one-one
relation; operator relation; operator-operand relation; order relation; positional
relation; string relation; substitutability relation; syntactic relation; transformational relation
- among alternants 27,29

464

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

(relation)
- among constructions 173
- among elements 12
- among morpheme classes 63
- among morphemes 36
- among sentence-forms 243
- among sentences 242, 243, 256
- at a distance 239
- between active verb and passive verb 20
- between equivalence classes 21
- of operator to argument 336
- of set with sets 94
- to neighboring sentence 342
- to report 294
relative clause 367, 430; see also non-restrictive relative clause; restrictive relative clause
relative
- frequency 14
- occurrence 4, 112, 346; see also restriction on relative occurrence
- of elements 4, 110
- of morphemes 11
- of parts 3
- of phoneme sequences 11
- of sets 4
- position 181,295,334
removal of transformational paraphrase 348; see also redundancy-removal
repeat 252
- utterances 6
repeatability 199,310,334
repeated; see also class repeated; zeroing of repeated material
- category 243
- morpheme 37ff, 46, 68
- phonemic forms 90
- SUbstitution 47
- tests 65
- word 118
repetition 16, 59,227,246,323; see also morphemic repetition; operation, repeating of;
parallel repetition; referent-repeating
.
- in text 127
repetitive 284
- material 266; see also zeroing of repetitive material
- morpheme 39ff
- word 261
replacement 36
report 294, 295, 296; see also objective report; relation to report; speaker's relation to
report
- -sublanguage 295, 296

request 369

required variant 317
residual structure 267
regdue 164,229,241,246,298,346,370
respectively 319,320
restatement 71,89; see also historical restatement

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

465

restricted
- alternant 28
- cClmparative 309
- co-occurrence 146, 147, 207
- distribution 3, 60
- domain 301,314
- increment 300, 304
- meaning 341
- morpheme 104
- morphophonemics 315
- word-combination 295
restriction 4, 18, 161, 163, 214,255, 259, 279, 303, 305, 308, 313, 322, 326,330,338,
346; see also environmental restriction; formal restriction; grammatical restriction; order of restrictions; perfectivity restriction; selection restriction; string
restriction on transformations; structural restriction; subdomain restriction
- across sentence boundaries 108
- domain 342
- in domain 312
- of co-occurrence 193, 198
- range 175
- of individual co-occurrence 174
- of occurrence 92, 108, 111, 209
- of substitutability 82
- on combinability 350
- on element-combination 294
- on randomness 92
- on relative occurrence 4
- on string structure 238
reformulate - 321
removal of - 330, 332
special - 134
restrictionless
- source 321
- transform 295
restrictive relative clause 401,422
resultant 211, 223, 224, 225, 226, 229, 232, 249, 255, 256, 260,261, 278, 295, 328,
337,342,346
asyntactic - 229
combined - 282
- sentence 231,238,249,282,298,346
- sequence 337
- string 338
- two systems 294
reverse order 20,147,149,181,186,205
reversible
- order 208
- transformation 147,148
root 49,50; see also stem
rule 18, 270, 338,339; see also composition rule; formation rule; grammatical rule; normative rule of grammar

-'s 337
-s 161,166, 205; see also variant-s

466

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

-s 'plural' 170, 190, 198, 208
-s 'third person singular' 205
same 424
Sandhi 34, 35; see also alternation
Sapir, Edward 236
satisfaction 212, 242, 243
satisfied 146, 147, 171,211, 249
satisfier 240; see also scale of satisfiers
- set 276
satisfy 148,151,158,173,183,184,187,204,208,209,262
scale
- construction 423
- of naturalness 240
- of satisfiers 276
science 21,243; see also sUblanguage of science
scientific
~ discourse 9
- text 281
scope of operation 326
second operand 242
- tensing 308, 310, 312
second sentence 179, 180, 182, 183,221; see also deformed second sentence
secondary sentence 178,181,184,185,188,189,207,290
- operator 220
segment 15, 213, 214, 301, 334; see also morphemic segment; phonemic segment; verbal
segment
- of sentence 236
segmentation 15, 92, 120, 121; see also morphemic segmentation; time segmentation;
unique segmentation
selected environment 61; see also frame
selection 46,48, 55,57, 59, 64, 66, 68, 69, 239, 259, 301, 327, 338, 339,342,362;
see also difference in selection; extension of selection; word selection
common- 4
- of co-occurrents 320
- -ordering 345f
- restriction 234f
weak - 259
selectional; see also synonymity, selectional
- similarity 20
- subclass 15
self 168,206
semantic 45,58,189,209,232,313,324; see also local semantic similarity
- correlation 259
- interpretation 22, 237
- interpretation of syntax 331
- name 20
- need 4
- overlapping 331
seman tically
- determined equivalence 312
- equivalent 200
- inclusive 279
- weak verb 245

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

467

semantics 115
semi-colon 361,378,387
semi-lattice 281
Semitic 39, 49
sentence 12, 17, 18, 108, 162,163,184,189,209,229,236,237,242,243,257,258,
274, 295, 296, 299, 300, 327, 330, 331, 333, 334, 338, 351; see also base
sentence; component sentence; conjoined sentence; decomposition of sentence;
deformed sentence; derived sentence; elementary sentence; homonymous
sentences; independent sentence; kernel sentence; matched sentence; metalinguistic sentence; metasentence, morphophonemic source sentence; nominalization of sentence; nominalized secondary sentence; nominalized sentence; operand
sentence; operator sentence; order of sentences; ordering of sentences; parallel
sentences; primary sentences; quoted sentence; reconstructed sentence, relation
among sentences; resultant sentence; second sentence; secondary sentence;
segment of sentence; source sentence; subset of sentences; successive sentences;
untensed sen tense; well-formed sentence; S
addition of - 196
- adjunct 215
- boundary 201; see also restriction across sentence boundary
- change 258
- combination 175,176,178,183
- combiner 189
complex - 199
- construction 204, 294
decomposable - 258
- -decomposing algorithm 295
- decomposition 234,295
- difference 228
- environment 9, 14, 205, 306
- form 173, 269, 296, 298, 350; see also axiomatic sentence form; relation among
sentence forms
- paired 249
- generated by increment 333
included - 183
- insert 246, 257
intermediate - 312, 347
- intonation 180,334
- introducer 164; see also introducer of sentence
- -like internal structure 176f
neighboring - 15,295; see also relation to neighboring sentence
- of connected discourse 109
- -operator 216,219,220,221,222,234,246,248
- order 115
- -overlap 183,197,201
overlapping - 196
- -position 327
- section 224
- sequence 18,150,173,174,175,184,185
sequential- 187,209,210
- structure 45,55, 144, 153, 164, 166, 172, 181, 202, 208, 212, 236; see also elementary sentence structure
complicated - 174f
irregular - 176

468

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

(sentence)
subsidiary - 183, 184
- type 62, 171
sentential; see also position sentential
- object 393
- string 334
sequence 167; see also morpheme sequence; negative sequence; order of sequence; phonemic sequence; resultant sequence; sentence sequence; transformations, sequence
of; word sequence
- marker 189
- of arguments 337
- of classes 12
- of constructions 150
- of morphemes 45,59, 102,336
- of one 49
- of phonemes 23,25,36,334
- of symbols 270
- of words 258
sex affix 414
shared words 165,182,186,188
- sequence 208
sharing transformations 324
should 218,219,273
sign language 21
since 305
singular 39,40,43, 263
Siouan 65
sl 41,47
so 416
social institutions 275
some 28, 164, 206
someone 279
sometimes 64
sound 3,4,330
- change 8
non-linguistic - 6
source 130, 273, 295, 302, 307f, 311, 321, 322, 323, 324, 32:5, 326, 340f, 345, 347;
see also morphophonemic source; predicate source; restrictionless source; syntactic source; tensed source; time less source sentence; unrestricted source
- form 317,320
- increment 327
irregular - 339
regular - 339
- -sentence 295,312,327,332,336; see also timeless source sentence
speaker 7,11,18,19,341
- -addressee 93
speaker's relation to report 294
speaking habits 7,8,18
special distributions 34, 111
special forms 26,27,173
statement 4,5, 19,24, 27, 29, 33, 34, 37, 60,64,66,67,68,69,71,145,237,239,330;
see also distributional statement; grammatical statement; metastatement; morphological statement; ordered set of statements

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

469

(statement)
definitional - 300
stem 10, 17,27,38,50,53,59,64,73,99,100; see also root
stress 30, 32, 33, 57, 68, 69, 90, 216; see also compound stress; contrastive stress; emphatic
stress; reduced main stress; reduced stress
- -unit 102
string; see also center string; corresponding string position; resultant string; sentential string
- analysis 236, 237
- -change 312,336,340,345
changed - relation 336
coherent - 345
complex - relation 396
- complexity 336
- constant 336
- form 260
identical - of words 343
- of words 236, 345; see also word string
- property 238,332,342
- relation 336,343,344,345,347
- restriction on transformations 238
- shape 335, 336
- structure 239,275,304,337, 345;seealso restriction on string structure
- term 258
structural
- analysis 330
- . of text 11 7
- formula 146
- linguistics 10,144,145,173,198,202,294,298,299,327,342
- restriction 200
- theory 200
structure 170, 262, 270,296, 313, 332, 343; see also class structure; complex structure;
discourse structure; grammatical structure; increment structure; language structure; linguistic structure; morphological structure; normalization of structure;
phonemic structure; residual structure; sentence structure; string structure;
synchronic structure, syntactic structure; textual structure; transformational
structure; utterance structure
- exists in speaker 8
- for each text 114
- of human response 8
- of language 8, 198, 239
- of meaning 9
- of objective experience 8
- of physical world 8
- of subjective experience 8
- of text 107
style 149,197,207,233
stylistic variation 200
stylistically
- clumsy 20
- indifferent 108
stylistics 62, 108
subcategory 213, 214, 220, 222, 223, 224, 225, 232, 239, 244, 248, 253,255,267,269,
272,278; see also time subcategories, word subcategories

470

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

subclass 13,48,51,60,99,146,147,156,163,169,170, 172, 181,189,191,193,212,
222, 300; see also grammatical subclass; overlapping subclasses; selectional subclass
- of morphemes 303
- properties 300
subdomain 300,304,306,314,324,326,327
- restriction 330
su bgrammar 332
subject 11,20,91,96,97,98, 164, 165, 168, 169, 170, 172, 186, 191, 208, 213, 219, 245,
251, 255, 257, 259, 261, 262, 277, 283, 318, 326,333,336,337,342, 343f;
see also independent subject; passive subject; l:
- matter 262, 324, 340
- classification 335
- language 279
prior - 344
repeating of - 253
subjective 11,233,339,345
- discrimination 341
- information 348
- semantic character 296
- tense 341
subjunctive 303,304,305, 317f, 339,427
sublanguage 295, 296, 330, 332, 383, 384, 385; see also report sublanguage
- grammar 346
- of particular science 348
- of science 349
subordinate 174
- clause 378,430
- conjunction 219,228,250, 32lf, 398, 415; see also Cs
subordinating conjunction 164,181,186,222
subordination 58
subordinative 53
subscript 57
subsequently 304,305,317,339
subset 321,331, 342; see also grammatical subset
- list 339
- of domain 341
- of English 315
- of morpheme occurrence 349
- of sentences 211, 239, 296; see also unrestricted subset of sentences
- of words 319
substandard speech 4
substantive 243
- information 233
substituent 115
substitutability 17, 20,50,59, 139, 208; see also restriction of substitutability
- relation 22
substitutable 9,49,53,55,102,200; see also parallel substitutability
substitute 14, 163, 201
substitution 46, 50, 61, 62, 63, 69, 144, 245; see also extending substitution; frame of
substitution; pro-word substitution; repeated substitution
- as criterion for class membership 61
- -class 47f,48, 55,67,68, 115; see also extension of substitution classes

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

471

( substitution)
- set 17, 18
succession
- of adjectives 22
- of elementary operations 274
- of transformations 260
successive sentences 179, 185,326
sufficient and necessary for informa tion 296
suffix 17,24,27,37,49,60,63,64,67,80,99,161,172,215,300, 354,369,413,420;
see also clause suffix; inflectional suffix; plural suffix; utterance suffix; verbalizing suffix; zero suffix
always occurring - 80
- of noun phrase 38
- of verb phrase 64
non-clause-final - 60
superposing 336,338,339
superscript 64; see also raised numbering
suppletion 24, 34
suppletive 26, 82
suprasegmental
- feature 63
- morpheme 68
Swahili 39,41,42
symbol 24,54,62,65,66,68,80,116,214,234,240,244, 246,252,255, 256, 257, 277,
278; see also morphophonemic symbol; order of symbols; sequence of symbols
synchronic structure 8,21
synonym 14,35,141,279,305,323,348,349,350
synonymity 254,261,278,349; see also local synonymity
selectional - 349
synonymous 252, 262
syntactic
- analysis 45
- construction 41
- domain 38, 39f, 41
- element 331,340, 348f
- environment 340
- method 342
- position 40
- primitives 323; see also primitives of syntax
- regularity 335
- relation 296,321,322,332,333,336,338,339,343,345
- source 322,335,338
- status 78,261,299,338
- structure 322
syntactically environing morphemes 349
syntax 45, 322, 350; see also primitives of syntax
tense
-

166, 167, 172, 175, 209, 213, 238, 252, 266, 305, 306, 315, 333, 373,400,411,
418, 425; see also compound tense; future tense; morphophonemic tense; past;
present tense; second operand tensing; subjective tense
dependencies 316
insert 246
-pair 306

472

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

(tense)
- -transplacing 308,310,312
tensed source 316
tenseless; see un tensed sentence
tensing 334,336
text 107, 151; see also critique of text; regularize text; repetition in text; scientific text;
structure of text
- critique 138
- expansion 139
extended - 139
textual
- environment 205
- sttucture 139; see also structure for each text
than 314
that 191,217,218,219,225,248,264,269,422
the 50,51,164,259,280,321, 323; see also automatic the
theory 214; see also competing theories; metatheory; structural theories; transformational
theory
- of elementary operations 274
- of language 240,321
there 163,167,172,188,213
time 215,222,246,252,306
- -adverb 303,317
- -conjunction 305,341
- -connectives 308
- dependence 317
- -location adverb 304,306, 307f, 316, 317
- -location dependence 305
- -noun 307,312
- -order 305,400
- -order conjunction 305ff, 312,425
- -order words 368,373
- predicate 308,317
- segmentation 341
- -subcategories 213
timeless source sentence 316
to 191,219,273
tone 16
trace 223,224,225,278,284,327,328,347,365
transference 8
transform 110, 241, 302, 328; see also conjunctional transform; paraphrastic transform;
predicate transform; restrictionless transform
transformation 19f, 111, 115, 116f, 126, 127ff, 135, 136, 143ff, 147, 148, 167,171,174,
178, 192, 197, 209, 212, 239, 241, 244, 260, 296, 297, 304, 342, 381, 396;
see also binary transformation; complementary transformation; component
transformation; conjunctional transformation; decomposition of transformations;
degenerate transformation; domain of transformation; elementary transformation;
grammatical transformation; identity transformation; incremental transformation;
independent transformation; inverse transformation; many·~me transformation;
middle transformation; non-paraphrastic transformation; non-reversible transformation; one-directional transformation; order of transformations; ordered
transformations; paraphrastic transformation; partially ordered transformations;
partial transformation; productive quasi-transformation; quasi-transformation;

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

473

(transformation)
reversible transformation; sharing transformation; succession of transformations;
unary transformation; unique transformations; unordered set of transformations;
unrestricted incremental transformation
apparent - 317
asyntactic - 244,246,280,372
criteria for - 240-3
decomposable - 212, 260; see also decomposition of transformations
families of - 243, 244
- from subset of sentences to another 333
- indicator 179
latest - 345
- list 130ff, 187
- -occurrence 281
- on resultant 225
- once established 256
organization of - 298
sequence of - 197
transformational 271, 273; see also removal of transformational paraphrase
- analysis 198, 236, 237, 275, 300; see also extension of transformational analysis;
productive transformational analysis
- criterion 207
- decomposition 281; see also computation of transformational decomposition
- degeneracy 295
- divisor 261; see axiomatic transformational divisor
- equivalence 207
- equivalent 228
- extension 216
- grammar 256
- linguistics 326,327
- method 295
new - relation 232
- relation 281
- representation 336, 345
- structure 240
- term 258
- theory 282,236,281,332,335
special- type 212
transformationally
- derived 201, 295
- equivalent 126,215
- intermediate 282
transformed verb 140
translation 9, 210
truth value 382
Tiibatulabal 27, 31
Turning machine 387
typology 202
unacceptable 260
unary 251,274,281; see also incremental unary
non-elementary - 252
- operation 221

474

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

(unary)
pure - 249, 255
- transformation 243, 246, 282
unclassed morpheme 120
uncomfortable 153,230,244,283,302,322,347
undecidable 171
- as to sentencehood 242
ungrammatical 258
unimorphemic word 239,258
unique 32,33,155,156,231,265,312
- altemant 35
- analysis 143
- combination 10
- construction 171
- environment 15
- operation 265
segmentation 92
- set of co-occurrents 143, 144
- transformation 265
- word 275
- zeroing 309
universal 383
- point 282
- quantifiers 323
unordered set of transformations 281
unresolved ambiguity 341
unrestricted 295,300,302,327,339
- free variants 300, 327
- increment 317
- incremental transformation 298
- morphophonemic source 300,314,327
- operator 302
- source 312,314
- subset of sentences 327
- variant 326
untensed sentence 326
until 305
utterance 3, 12, 18, 45, 59, 62, 63, 89; see also minimum utterance, repeat utterance
- -initial 52
- structure 49,80,86
- suffix 60
non-occurring - 70
value 62,70,146, 151,213, 233,257, 334, 335, 338, 349f
variable 233,296,297,298,326,327,331,334, 349f; see also class variable
variables characterized 349
variant 26,38,39,40,41,44,161,178,185,201,206,321; see also automatic variant;
free variant; morpheme variant; morphophonemic variant; positional variant;
required variant; unrestricted variant; zerovariant
- form 64
- forms of sentence 173
- of morpheme 86
positionally bound - 173

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

475

(variant)

- -s 172

special- 72
verb 11,25, 39,40, 49f, 50, 51, 59, 91, 92, 95, 100, 104,213,233,277,295,302,305,
306ff, 318, 321, 322, 324, 325, 338, 414; see also appropriate verb; binary
verb; collective verb; conjunctional verb; connective verb; dative verb; independent verb; norninalized verb; reciprocal verb; semantically weak verb; transformed verb
adjunct 321
base 83
complement 429
inter-sentence - 322
irregular - 314
new - 249
- -operator 246,247,286,321,335
- phrase 51,56,64, 425-30; see also suffix of verb phrase: V-phrase
- prefix 9
verbal segment 333
verbalizing suffix 245
very 302
vocabumry 8,108,258,295,300,330,349
- ambiguity 380
vowel 24, 27; see also discontinuous vowel
- change 34, 81
- harmony 81,87
well-formed 332
- sentence 258
well-formedness; see also kernel well-formedness
- requirement 257
wh- 131, 164, 165, 166, 172, 176, 177,179,184, 185, 186, 188, 197,206,221,223,225,
226,227, 228, 242,250,251,254,257,262,264,266,272,308,312,323,326,
369
- -conjunction 307
- -connective 273,310
- -insert 267,268,280
- -pro-morpheme 164
- -word 264, 279, 280
whatever 280
where 165
whether 217,218,225,248,269,277,434
which 157,162,164
while 305
wh-is excision 272,' 273
who 20,171
why 164,167
will 161, 172,215
word 17, 27, 60, 212, 265, 296, 334,338; see also appropriate word; compared words;
conjunctional word; echo words; independent words; non-zeroed word; operator
word; order of words; pro-word; quantified word; reconstructed word; repeated
word; repetitive word; sequence of words; shared words; shared word sequence;
sequence of words; subset of words; time-order word; uni-morphernic word;
unique word; wh-words

476

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

(word)
- boundary 30
- category 91, 94, 278; see also extended word category; repeated word category
- choice 171,211,297; see also normal word choice; selection
- class 414
- combination 295; see also restricted word-combination
- co-occurrence 199,233
- -entry ch 13
- -initial 23
- -length 17
recoverable - 212
recurren t - 179
- -selection 211,215,229,231,233; see also operation of word selection
- acceptance 229
- -sequence 295, 336
- -sharing 181,183,184,185,188,192,197,199
- -string 338, 350; see also string of words; identical string of words
- subcategory 222; see also subset of words
- sub-sequence 342
- -value 301
writing 330; see also morphophonemic writing; phonemic writing
Yawelmani 81
yes-no 178,179,207,264,325
Yokuts 37
you 279

zero 25,26,31,52,63,80,82,87,90,92,93,95,97,99,103, 104, 155,159,164,167,
169,172,176,177,179,180,185,186,197,205,208,209,213, 217,232,
248,249,252,257,279,327,337,357,366,371,374
- affix 247
- alternate 93,97,103
- likelihood 355
- morpheme 25, 103, 174, 205, 206
- phonemes 261
- prl'fix 41
- recurrence 169,172, 174, 178, 189, 195, 209
- suffix 161
- variant 155,166,173,175,179,181,182,191
zeroable 265,268,279,301,304,312,313,318,320, 340f
- operator 327
zeroed 181, 182, 207, 224, 227, 249, 253, 257, 266, 268, 294, 316, 319, 358, chs 14-16
zeroing 234, 244, 250, 251, 267, 276, 277, 278, 279, 283,284,290,295,300,301,308,
310ff, 314, 315, 319, 326, 328, 334, 338, 340, 341, 342, 343, 361, 364, 365,
366, 367, 371, chs 14-16; see also disjunction zeroing; morphophonemic zeroing;
phoneme, zeroing of; referrential zeroing; unique zeroing
- of defmition pronoun 246, 267
- of redundant material 261
- of repeated material 254
- of repitive material 279
- of repetitive subject 270
- operation 226,277

INDEX OF SYMBOLS

= 204

..... 277, 296, 298; see also transformation
- S -- N 187,199
- S - S 187,189
~ S 277, 298

A 51, 170, 213, 215, 220,420; see also adjective
descriptive 185
- pro- - 167, 172, 179; see also pro-adjective
Aly 247; see also adverb, manner adverb
A-phrase 165,186; see also adjective phrase
C 159,160,165,171,172,180,181,207,208,215,221,249; see also conjunction
discontinuous - 181
- zero 192
CK 216,284
CS 177
pro- - 167
Cs 219, 267; see also subordinate conjunction
Cvv 333
D 51,157,171,180,188,213,214,215,220,229, 247, 253; see also adverb
I 403f,406

K 212, 215, 216, 217, 237, 332; see also kernel
- deformed 217,219,262,279
- form 232
- like 224, 229, 232, 273; see also kernel-like
- operator on 216, 217, 219
- primary 266
restriction of intro- - 215
- secondary 262, 266
similar to - 261
- structure 214,231
special - -type 212
Kn 218, 220; see also nominalized kernel

Kn O 218,220
Kn' 218,220

N 50, 213, 214, 355, 404, 406, 407; see also noun; noun phrase
- class 163
concrete - class 335
indefinite - 311
- of measure 256
non-specific - 418
- operator 335

477

478

INDEX OF SYMBOLS

(N)

pro- - 164, 172, 206; see also pro-noun
- pro-object 179
- pro-subject 179
zero - 268,269
zero pro- - 164
N + na 204
P + pro-- 179
zero pro- - 164
N-phrase 164,168,174,180,187, 189;see also noun phrase
appositional - 186
bound pro- - 165
- class 163
- construction 204
internal structure of - 187
pro- - 163, 164, 172
- structure 172
NP 171
NPN'158
N t V 0 224, 257
NV 59
Nc1 280; see also classifier; classifier noun

a
On
ann

°nnn
°nnnn
°nno
°no
°noo
00
0 00

355,404,406,407
356,404
356,361,404,408,416,427,428
356
356
356
356,364,383,404
356
356,361,364,365,370,383,404
379,382,386,415,416,427,358,361,363,364,369,372,374

P 52,171,213; see also preposition
zeroing of - 253
PN 157,170,171,180,188,214,220,247,420
wh + - 165
P N P 159,171
P P 151, 171
PO 217
S; see also sentence
deformation of - 253
nominalized 167
pro-- 167,172,207
secondary 177, 208
S 1 difference between - and S 2 221
Sn 248,252,253,257,260,271,274,277,280, 289; see also nominalized sentence

Sn' 248,252,257,266,277
Sn O 248,252,253,257
-

deformation 274

INDEX OF SYMBOLS

213,215, 246;seea[so tense
T 51,163,206; see also article
V 51,213,214,216,257,259, 335;seea[so verb
appropriate - 255
- connective 251
deformed - 262
non-measure - 256
operator - 232
to- 167,169,207,208
two- - construction 167,168,172
pro- - 165ff, 168, 172; see also pro-verb
zero pro- - 166
V + PN 158
V N N construction 170, 172
V P 166,187
VP + N 158
vn 267
- -operator 223
- on 216, 217
V-phrase 167,168,172,180,185,204; see also verb phrase
pro-- 166,172,179
two- - 169
Vn
277, 333; see also nominalized verb
Vnn
333,339
Vnnn 333
Vnnv 333
Vnv
333
Vnvv
333
Vv
333
Vvv
333,339,342
Ving 167,169,170,184,190,207,209,217, 252;seealso -ing
Xi 51
Xy 54
-Xy 52
Xy- 52f
l: 213,216,217,225, 234; see also subject
l: t vn 231,233
Ltv .111 .112 213
I{J 237
ljJ K 212
.11 213,215,216,217,225,234,257,261,262,267; see also object

479

SYNTHESE LANGUAGE LIBRARY

Texts and Studies in Linguistics and Philosophy
Managing Editors:
JAAKKO HINTIKKA (Florida State University)
STANLEY PETERS (The University of Texas at Austin)
Editors:
EMMON BACH (University of Massachusetts at Amherst), JOAN BRESNAN
(Massachusetts Institute of Technology), JOHN LYONS (University of Sussex),
JULIUS M. E. MORAVCSIK (Stanford University), PATRICK SUPPES (Stanford
Univ6rsity), DANA SCOTT (Oxford University).
1. Henry Hii (ed.), Questions. 1978.
2. William S. Cooper, Foundations of Logico-Linguistics. A Unified Theory of Information, Language, and Logic. 1978.
3. Avishai Margalit (ed.), Meaning and Use. 1979.
4. F. Guenthner and S. 1. Schmidt (eds.), Formal Semantics and Pragmatics for
Natural Languages. 1978.
5. Esa Saarinen (cd.), Game-Theoretical Semantics. 1978.
6. F. J. Pelletier (ed.), Mass Terms: Some Philosophical Problems. 1979.
7. David R. Dowty, Word Meaning and Montague Grammar. The Semantics of Verbs
and Times in Generative Semantics and in Montague's PTQ_ 1979.
8. Alice F. Freed, The Semantics of English Aspectual Complementation. 1979.
9. James McCloskey, Transformational Syntax and Model Theoretic Semantics:
A Case Study in Modern Irish. 1979.
10. John R. Searle, Ferenc Kiefer, and Manfred Bierwisch (eds.), Speech Act Theory
and Pragmatics. 1980.
11. David R. Dowty, Robert E. Wall, and Stanley Peters, Introduction to Montague
Semantics. 1981.
12. Frank Heny (cd.), Ambiguities in Intensional Contexts. 1981.
13. Wolfgang Klein and Willem Levelt (eds.), Crossing the Boundaries in Linguistics:
Studies Presented to Manfred Bierwisch. 1981.
14. Zellig S. Harris, Papers on Syntax, edited by Henry Hii. 1981.
15. Pauline Jacobson and Geoffrey K. Pullum (eds.), The Nature of Syntactic Representation. 1981. (Forthcoming).

