Description of Language Design
Martin Joos
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 22, 701-707 (1950)
https://doi.org/10.1121/1.1906674

LANGUAGE DESIGN 701

frequency distribution of vowels in the monsyllabic
words. We have investigated several languages from
this point of view. Figure 6 shows three examples.

For German, we have divided the phonemes |e| and
|o| into their two qualities [e, ¢ ] and [o, 2] respectively.
This was not done for the front rounded vowels where
the different qualities are phonemic in the pronunciation
of some native speakers. In a later version of our in-
vestigation we shall take these factors into considera-
tion. We were mainly interested in the comparison of
qualities of the vowels from the point of view of their
production. We have also omitted the analysis into
distinctive features which might make possible a more
expressive mode of formulation.‘

4 See paper by Lotz, “Speech and Language,” elsewhere in this

volume. I express my appreciation to Professor Lotz also for
details communicated to me directly.

In French, the palatal vowels, namely [a, e, i], domi-
nate. In English, the vowels are crowded in the neigh-
borhood of [a ] and these vowels are relatively similar to
each other. In German, on the other hand, the distribu-
tion is very different. There is a large difference between
the predominant vowels. The dominating vowels in
German are [a, i, u], that is to say, the most remote
points of the vowel-triangle. This agrees well with
the above-mentioned precision, characteristic of Ger-
mans.®

Probably this vowel arrangement of the three lan-
guages depends simply on the basis of articulation.

Other investigations along these lines have been be-
gun, but not yet finished.

6 The overlapping of the circles depends only on the value of the
relative frequencies; it has no phonetic value.

THE JOURNAL OF THE ACOUSTICAL SOCIETY OF AMERICA

VOLUME 22, NUMBER 6

Description of Language Design

MartTIN Joos
University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin
(Received August 8, 1950)

Physicists describe speech with continuous mathematics, such as Fourier analysis or the autocorrelation
function. Linguists describe language instead, using a discontinuous or discrete mathematics called “‘linguis-
tics.” The nature of this odd calculus is outlined and justified here. It treats speech communication as
having a telegraphic structure. (Non-linguists normally fail to orient themselves in this field because they
treat speech as analogous to telephony.) The telegraph-code structure of language is examined from top to
bottom, and at each of its several levels of complexity (compared to the two levels of Morse code) its
structure is shown to be defined by possibilities and impossibilities of combination among the units of that
level. Above the highest level we find, instead of such absolute restrictions, conditional probabilities of
occurrence: this is the semantic field, outside linguistics, where sociologists can work. Below the lowest
level we find, instead of such absolute restrictions, conditional probabilities of phonetic quality: this is the
phonetic field, outside linguistics, where physicists can work. Thus linguistics is peculiar among mathe-
matical systems in that it abuts upon reality in two places instead of one. This statement is equivalent to

NOVEMBER, 1950

defining a language as a symbolic system; that is, as a code.

HE word “design” may be interpreted in at least
two senses without violating engineering usage.
First, there is the work of the engineer who is designing
something, for example a telephone system. Second,
there is the finished something, such as that same tele-
phone system, considered now as something to be
analyzed and described. Our description of it, then,
can also be called its ‘design.’ It is in this last sense
that the word “‘design” has to be understood when we
are talking about the design of language and how it is
analyzed for description.

Engineers never have occasion to analyze a gadget the
way linguists do a language. The nearest thing to it
might be this sort of episode: A supplier had been
asked to furnish a band-pass filter, single T section,
with rather modest cut-off requirements. Instead of the
expected classical constant-k filter—two series arms,
‘one parallel arm, total three coils and three condensers

—he furnished a filter with three coils and four con-
densers connected in an unexpected way. The writer
was asked to analyze the design and report whether it
was worth adopting for future routine construction of
band-pass filters. It turned out that the odd design
had two advantages: one of the coils could be a large
stock-size coil used without trimming, and the design
gave any desired impedance-transformation without a
transformer. But—and here is the crucial point—it did
not seem to be possible to arrive at these conclusions
without taking into consideration the designer’s in-
tentions; and the experience seemed to show that a

“why” question has an answer only when intention is

in the picture—when the presence of intention is given,
so to speak, as a boundary-condition.

Linguists have described numerous languages, and
have observed language design-changes through the
centuries. But although quite a body of “how” knowl-

702 M.

edge concerning these matters has been built up, we
have so far nothing but a number of unconfirmable
guesses concerning the “why.” Hence most of us are
now pretty sure about one thing: there is nothing
conscious, nothing deliberate, about language-design.
(Naturally we don’t mean to study Basic English or
Esperanto until we have first built up the theory of
natural language design.) Accordingly we do not present
the design of any language as the result of intentions—
we do not answer “why” questions about the design of
a language.

Having thus limited our problem, we proceed with
greater confidence to look for answers to the ‘“‘how”
questions of language-design. In other words, we try to
describe precisely; we do not try to explain. Anything
in our description that sounds like explanation is simple
loose talk—deliberately loose, perhaps, for the sake of
persuasion by analogy—and is not to be considered
part of current linguistic theory.

We can allow other people—telephone engineers or
sociologists, for example—to speak artistically, im-
precisely, about language. But as linguists we lay upon
ourselves the condition that we must speak precisely
about language or not at all. We can do that, of course,
only under two conditions, of which the first has already
been hinted at. First, we must limit our field, leaving
outside it certain things to be treated precisely by
engineers or by sociologists, while we speak of them
more or less artistically. Second, within our field we
must adopt a technique of precise treatment, which is
by definition a mathematics. We must make our
“linguistics” a kind of mathematics, within which in-
consistency is by definition impossible. True, miscalcu-
lations may occur through inadvertence. And different
workers describing the same language may arrive at
conflicting statements because they have started out
from different sets of axioms. But in principle every
possible statement of ours must be either true or false—
nothing half-way.

Have linguists succeeded in setting up such a mathe-
matical style for describing language designs? Well, not
quite; but our science is still young. In its mathematical
phase it is just a quarter of a century old, for we date it
from Bloomfield’s ‘Set of Postulates for the Science of
Language” (in the journal Language in 1925). And even
physics has not yet entirely resolved the conflict be-
tween quantum theory and the wave theory of light.
But of all the sciences and near-sciences which deal
with human behavior, linguistics is the only one which
is in a fair way to becoming completely mathematical,
and other social scientists are already beginning to
imitate the strict methods of the linguists.

Presenting only “how” statements without regard to
“why,” we of course have no assurance that we are
“right” in the sense that would satisfy a theologian.
And we feel that our descriptive statements fit actual
speech-behavior, but we have no right to claim that
they are “‘correct” in the sense that they fit the neural

JOOS

events in the brains of the speaker and listener. Such
arrogant modesty is not peculiar to linguists; it is
simply the normal attitude of mathematicians con-
fronting the real world. The mathematical description
for reality has been most illuminatingly called a “‘map.”
Now when one holds a map (in the ordinary sense) in
one’s hands, one may say, “I feel that this is a map of
the countryside around me here,” but there is no way
to prove logically that it is not instead a map of a
piece of Australia or perhaps of some imaginary
Treasure Island. Undeterred by the impossibility of
logical justification, explorers use maps, scientists use
mathematics, and linguists use the descriptive technique
called “‘linguistics.” All three have the same attitude
toward the map. One proceeds across the terrain and
simultaneously traces a line across the map; one notes
discrepancies between the map and the direct appre-
hension of the real world, until the discrepancies seem
to form a pattern themselves; then one corrects the
map and starts all over again. All this is intuitive be-
havior, and logically unjustifiable. Nor does it need
justification. The place for logic is inside the map,
not between the map and the real world.

Ordinary mathematical techniques fall mostly into
two classes, the continuous (e.g. the infinitesimal cal-
culus) and the discrete or discontinuous (e.g. finite
group theory). Now it will turn out that the mathe-
matics called ‘‘linguistics”’ belongs in the second class.
It does not even make any compromise with continuity,
as does statistics, or infinite-group theory. Linguistics is
a quantum mechanics in the most extreme sense. All
continuity, all possibilities of infinitesimal gradation,
are shoved outside of linguistics in one direction or the
other. There are in fact two such directions in which
we can and resolutely do expel continuity: semantics
and phonetics.

Every language has “meaningful” molecules called
“‘morphemes,” sub-assemblies which roughly correspond
to subdivisions of the real world outside language. The
word nose, for example, consists of one such morpheme;
the word noses consists of two, the second having as its
real-world correspondent the conventional category of
numerousness, one of our customary subdivisions or
categorizations of the real world. Now consider these
facts. The English word nose may refer to a part
(how much?) of an airplane. With a lipstick draw a
loop on your own face enclosing your nose and nothing
else; another person will say that you have enclosed
either too much or too little. Say in English: “The
councillors all put their glasses on their noses’ and then
get the sentence translated into German; for English
noses you will get the singular noun-form Nase, not the
plural Nasen. The German knows that numerous
councillors have equally numerous noses, and he has a
word for ‘“‘noses,”’ but in this sentence he uses his word
for ‘‘nose” instead. In linguistic terminology we simply
say that the form Nase belongs to the category which
we have called “singular.” We chose that name the way

LANGUAGE DESIGN 703

the physicist chose the name “work,” because in
German the category most often refers to lack of
numerousness in the things referred to; but this is
not a logical reason, it is only a motivation out of con-
venience. High-school physics teachers often have good
reason to regret the choice of the term “work” for
force times distance, and in expounding linguistic
theory we often have the same reason for regretting
the choice of terms “‘singular” and “plural.” The trained
listener, the listening linguist in this case, is not de-
ceived; he knows that in cauing Nase “singular” we
have not said whether one nose or more than one nose
was involved.

We keep on and say a few thousand things like this,
but as long as we are talking about German or English
we never place a noun-form in a third category side by
side with “singular” and “plural,” say a category which
is neither singular nor plural, or is both, or is ambiguous
as to number. The listening linguist, noting the absence
of this other kind of statement, sooner or later decides
that in German or in English every noun-form is either
singular or else plural—tertium non datur. This may be
called the tyranny of linguistic categories. It is found
in every language. It is not a question of “correctness”
in the popular sense of the word, for every kind of
speech, elegant or sub-standard, has its own categorical
tyrannies. For example, in the writer’s dialect the form
whom cannot follow a pause: it is permissible to say
“To whom did you give it?” or “Who did you give
it to?” but not “Whom did you give it to?” In situations
where the normal language-design is not quite adequate,
such as in the composition of a paper like this, we get
amusing difficulties, such as finding it necessary to say
either ‘one nose or more than one nose was involved”
or else “‘one nose or several noses were involved.” The
difficulty is just as severe if we say “‘one sheep or more-
than-one/several sheep was/were involved.” That is,
it is the category that tyrannizes over us, not the form,
and not the meaning either ; and even a word like sheep
must be, each time that it is used, either singular or
else plural. We might like to replace was/were with a
verb-form which was, like the Irishman’s trousers,
singular at the top and plural at the bottom, but we
haven’t got any such category in English. In fact, in
every known language there is a limit to the kinds and
numbers of its categories, a limit which may seem very
low compared to the elaborations which philosophers
and poets indulge in. Then when an unusual message
is to be transmitted, the categories are never split or
supplemented, but are instead used in unusual com-
binations. The listener’s total reaction may or may not
be as expected, but his detail reactions are predictable
at least to this extent: For every form-class represented
in the utterance (“noun” is one form-class, “verb” is
another) there are a certain number of dimensions of
categorization (in the English noun there are two:
possessive-versus-common, and singular-versus-plural);
and now, for every dimension thus introduced into the

utterance, the listener will react to exactly one of the
categories in that dimension—he will not react to more
than one, or to none, whether the utterance is am-
biguous or not. The reader can check this fact easily.
Without looking back to the sentence about the
councillors, let him ask himself whether it referred to
present time or to past time. He will find that he has
made up his mind one way or the other; and yet, on
checking the wording, he will find that he was not told.
The English categorization, past-versus-present, forced
him to decide, even though the decision had to be made
at random. Each language does this within the range of
its own categories, which will not be the same range as in
our language. In Chinese, for example, the translation
lacks both the past-versus-present dimension and the
singular-versus-plural dimension ; these ‘‘meanings”’ can
be indicated on occasion, but when they are not, the
Chinese listener leaves the question open—he says he
is not even aware that it is a question.

The linguistic categories, then, are absolutes which
admit of no compromise. They correspond roughly to
favorite categorizations in the real world, and it is
generally held that every community subdivides the
phenomena in the real world according to the categories
of its language, rather than the reverse. But the corre-
spondence between the discrete categories of the lan-
guage and the continuous phenomena of the real world
is not and cannot be precise. Our reaction, as linguists,
to this situation, is very simple: all phenomena, whether
popularly regarded as linguistic (such as the tone of
anger in an utterance) or not, which we find we cannot
describe precisely with a finite number of absolute
categories, we classify as non-linguistic elements of the
real world and expel them from linguistic science. Let
sociologists and others do what they like with such
things—we may wish them luck in their efforts to
describe them precisely in their own terminology, but
no matter whether they describe them with discrete
categories or not, for us they remain vague, protean,
fluctuating phenomena—in a word, for us they repre-
sent that “continuity” which we refuse to tolerate in
our own science.

Have we ever had any choice? Could we have chosen
to use a continuous rather than a discrete mathematics
for describing language-design? Or perhaps an am-
biguous mathematics which can be read both ways?
Our experience with the analysis of a few hundred of
the world’s several thousand languages makes us very
sure that we must answer negatively. When we hear
of an imaginative child who has identified the “too”’ of
“this one is too big” with the “two” of “two big ones”
and then has experimented with saying “one-and-a-half
big” and “three big” by way of weakening or strengthen-
ing the notion of “too big,” we recognize that this is
not the way languages work and we decide that that
child was not only imaginative but probably also
imaginary.

So much for the semantic end of language, with its

704 | M. Joos:

intuitive bridge between language and the real outside
world, the bridge across which we banish continuity.
We do exactly the same thing at the other end, the
phonetic end of language. But there we are not dealing
with philosophers; in the phonetic field we have to put
our case to telephone engineers, experimental pho-
neticians, and other hard-headed citizens who will not
be easy to convince. Let us state our view first, then
discuss it.

Here we have “phonemics”’ inside linguistic science;
and “phonetics,” which is not so very different from
and may even be considered a division of the physicist’s
“acoustics,” in the realm of overt speech-behavior,
which is not the realm of linguistics but belongs to
the real world outside linguistics. When a physicist
analyzes speech he finds a continuum of articulatory
activity, of sound, and of events in the ear—at least
until, working both ways from the sound, he comes to
the all-or-none discharging of single nerve-fibers—and
for describing any or all of this he uses a continuous
mathematics, for instance Fourier analysis or the auto-
correlation function. On the other hand, linguists have
found it appropriate always to describe every language
so far studied as having, and every act of speech as
corresponding to, combinations of an astonishingly small
number of smallest signalling units called “phonemes”
which recur identically insofar as they can be said to
occur at all. Thus the word hotel cannot be spoken the
same twice, from the physicist’s viewpoint, no matter
whether the same person or different persons should
utter it; and yet from the linguist’s viewpoint it always
has in the middle a phoneme /é/ which is identically
the same every time. And it is not considered identical
through neglect of unimportant variations in reality;
rather, it is identical by definition, simply because it is
a linguistic atom, a category, and these are either
identically the same or absolutely different.

Here, then, we have another case where linguistics
insists upon being atomistic and banishes continuity to
the world outside language. Is this the right and only
thing for a linguist to do? Telephone engineers have
been known to protest at this point and say something
like this: “When you were discussing linguistic dis-
creteness and non-linguistic continuity in the semantic
field you had me where you wanted me, for how should
an engineer know anything about semantics? But now
you are talking about sound, and here I am perfectly
at home; I have even made extensive and precise ob-
servations upon normal speakers and listeners: for in-
stance, I have gathered statistics about the variations
in vowel qualities. Your mathematically identical pho-
nemes are a delusion; what you’ve got are statistical
norms, clusterings around averages which you take as
norms and then arbitrarily make into absolutes. We are
both talking about phonetics ; and when you admit that
I can prove continuity, you can’t claim to prove dis-
creteness.

“Let us agree to neglect the least important features

of speech sound, so that at any moment we can de-
scribe it sufficiently well with » measurements, a point
in n-dimensional continuous space, ” being not only
finite but a fairly small number, say six. You agree?
Good. Now the quality of the sound becomes a point
which moves continuously in this 6-space, sometimes
faster and sometimes slower, so that it spends more or
less time in different regions, or visits a certain
region more or less often. In the long run, then, we
get a probability-density for the presence of the moving
point anywhere in the 6-space. This probability-density
varies continuously all over the space. Now wherever
you can find a local maximum of probability-density,
a place where the probability-density does not increase
for short distances in any direction away from the
place in question, I will let you call that place a
‘phoneme’; and I expect, just as you do, that there will
be not only a finite but a fairly small number of such
points, say less than a hundred. Thus you see that
there is no need to use a discrete mathematics to get a
finite number of phonemes out of the phonetic con-
tinuum.”

We could answer that our name for that would be,
not ‘“‘phoneme,”’ but ‘‘allophone,” and allophones belong
to phonetics while phonemes belong to linguistics. But
that would be evading the issue. The engineer’s argu-
ment is a formidable one, and deserves to be met
squarely. According to our view concerning the rela-
tionship between any mathematical map and the real
phenomena to which it corresponds, it is not possible
to argue logically in this field; therefore we have to
argue by means of analogy. Fortunately a suitable
analogy lies ready to hand.

Let us consider telegraphy, using Morse or Baudot
coding. The units are the mark and the space; it doesn’t
matter whether the “space”’ is an electrical impulse of
opposite polarity to the “mark,” or an electrically
neutral period. A Morse dash could be considered as
three integrally sequent marks, and a letter-space as
three spaces; then the units differ in only one dimen-
sion. Or the dash and the letter-space may be con-
sidered as independent signals; then there are four
signals, differing from each other in two dimensions,
namely electrical intensity (or polarity) and duration.
Thus there are at least two ways of describing the
Morse code, both discrete and both correct, each by
its own axioms.

A Morse S is mark-space-mark-space-mark. A Baudot
Y is mark-space-mark-space-mark—shall we say ‘“‘also”’?
That depends; we can settle it later. At the far end of a
long line, the marks and spaces are slurred together
into a continuous smooth fluctuation so that on first
inspection it may be far from easy to tell what the
original signals must have been. Then a regenerative
repeater is used to square up the marks and spaces so
that they can be read or will operate an ordinary tele-
typewriter. But if the line is very long, not much noise
will be needed to cause occasional errors in the re-

LANGUAGE DESIGN 705

peater’s operation. A regenerative repeater for Baudot
signals will in general not handle Morse signals, or
vice versa.

Now let us find a telephone engineer who knows
nothing about telegraphy, and give him the output of
a long telegraph line. What does he do with it? He does
Fourier analysis and autocorrelation and perhaps some-
thing else—at any rate, at first he works on it with
continuous mathematics, for the material is obviously
continuous. But as long as he does that, he can make
no sense out of it. In desperation he next differentiates
the output voltage, so that he has two data for every
instant, the voltage and its first time-derivative. Now
for each five milliseconds he averages each of these,
and plots the two averages as a single point on a sheet
of graph-paper. When he has put a few thousand points
on his paper, he sees a continuous variation of point-
density, with a number of local maxima—perhaps a few
dozen of them. To each maximum he assigns a label,
a letter or a number, arbitrarily. Now he interprets his
original data, his voltage and derivative data, in terms
of these labels: every time the line-output and its
derivative come close to one of those maximum-density
points, he will write down the label of that point, so
that finally he has replaced the original data by a
string of those labels. Now he can turn this result over
to a cryptanalyst, who will be able to read the original
plain-language text out of it—not quite completely on
first reading, but probably he will be able to reconstruct
a good text if he knows the language well. Ridiculous?
Not at all. This is exactly what our telephone engineer
wanted to do with phonetics and phonemics.

Now we also know what that same telephone engi-
neer will do after we tell him of the existence of tele-
graph codes employing molecular signals made up of
atomic units, each unit being identically one or another
of a very small number of atoms. He will not use
Fourier analysis or any other continuous mathematics
at first. Rather, he will start out by looking for wave-
trains that look nearly alike, their slight differences
being explicable, as he can easily see, either as the
effects of noise or as the effects of context. He will see
many occurrences of a three-peaked wave-train, no two
occurrences precisely alike. But when the first peak is
rather low, then there will be a long hollow before it;
when there is no hollow, the first peak is as high as the
second or a bit higher. This is a context-effect. Once the
context-effects have been spotted, the remaining varia-
tions will be ascribed to noise. In this fashion he will
learn to identify the three-peaked wave for Morse S or
Baudot Y, and also all the other common molecular
signals.

Next he will set up the hypothesis that there are
just ~ atomic signalling units, and that not only the
inter-molecular context-effects but also the intra-mo-
lecular smoothings can be accounted for by low-pass
filtering. Here he can use continuous mathematics for
a while, and the result will be that this hypothesis

works best if m equals two. Now it won’t take him long
to reconstruct the entire telegraphic code; quite easily
if it is Baudot, not so easily or swiftly if it is Morse,
but in either case with absolute certainty.

Finally he will describe the design of the telegraphic
code, and he will describe it in terms of absolutely
identical square-wave signalling atoms, even though he
has never observed anything that could be called ab-
solute identity, and even though he knows that square
waves are impossible. And when he has thus finished
his job, he will be able to convince his colleagues, the
other telephone engineers who knew nothing about
telegraphy, that this is the right way to do it. Convince
them by logic? Not a chance. Nothing but the superior
elegance of his results will speak for the rightness of
his method, but that will be enough.

Linguists find themselves so successful in describing
languages in this fashion that they have elevated their
descriptive technique to the rank of a theory about
the nature of language. They say, in effect, that the
design of any language is essentially telegraphic—that
the language has the structure of a telegraph-code, using
molecular signals made up of invariant atoms, and
differing from e.g. the Morse code principally in two
ways, one of which has already been hinted at: the
codes called “languages” have numerous layers of com-
plexity instead of only two, and in each layer there are
severe limitations upon the combinations permitted.
This much, we find, all languages have in common.
But the particular code is different from one language or
dialect to another, as the Baudot and Morse codes
differ. Those two telegraphic codes share, on the phe-
nomenal level, this molecular signal among others:
mark-space-mark-space-mark. Now suppose we find this
signal in the output of one telegraph line, and find it
again in the output of another telegraph line; are they
the same or are they not the same? That depends. If
they are both Morse or both Baudot, then they are
identically the same signal, no matter whether or not
they are distorted by different noises or different line
characteristics, or are sent at different speeds, or by a

well-adjusted or a badly-adjusted transmitter. If one

is Morse and the other is Baudot, then they are not in
the least the same signal, even when their oscillograms
come out the same within the limits of instrumental
error.

This is obvious to any telegraph engineer. But in the
linguistic field it did not seem obvious or even credible
to a certain engineer who said to the writer: ‘Surely
you can tell when two men pronounce the word father
alike!’ The answer had to be: “On the data you have
given me, the question has no meaning. First I have to
find out whether they rhyme father with bother. If they
both do, or neither does, then I must find out whether
both of them or neither of them pronounces cot-like
caught. Then I have a few more questions of the same
sort, with which I explore their contrasts for some dis-
tance around the word father in all directions. If I

706 | M. JOOS

always get the same answer from both of them, then I
say, ‘Yes, they pronounce father alike,’ meaning ‘identi-
cally the same,’ even if they sound quite different when
they say the word. But if, during this exploration, I find
a discrepancy between their systems of phonemic con-
trasts before I have gone very far from the word father
itself, then I shall have to say, ‘No, they pronounce it
differently,’ meaning ‘their pronunciations are incom-
mensurable,’ even if they sound so much alike that no
difference can be heard.” This statement was met with
amazed incredulity, and a request to state honestly
whether anybody else held similar views. It is to be
feared that the answer to this request was not accepted
at face value. The trouble was, of course, that no bridge
had been built between the engineer’s knowledge of
telegraphy and the language experience of linguists.

Now let us go on with the design of language. We
have dealt with the phonemes individually, and shown
that the most important thing about them is that they
are either absolutely the same or absolutely different.
And yet, in another sense it is to be expected that two
of them can be partly the same and partly different.
This can be possible in this way. If it is possible to put
phoneme A into three categories x, y, and z (as the
word noses simultaneously belongs to the three cate-
gories “noun,” “common rather than possessive,” and
“‘plural’’), and to put phoneme B into three categories
v, w, and z (as the word were belongs to the three cate-
gories ‘‘verb,” “past,” and “plural’’), then A and B
can be said to be similar, but of course only in the sense
that they are partly identical, the degree of similarity
being quantized as demonstrated. These quantized par-
tial identities will serve to build up the design of the
phonemic system. Only one warning needs to be given:
the worker should at each step ask himself whether it
would make any difference whether he uses “component
parts” or “intersecting categories” in dealing with such
similarities. The phonetician is all too likely to use
component parts in a field where intersecting categories
. are alone in order; that is one reason why the phonemic
pattern was here presented parallel to the grammatical
instance, for there is little temptation to speak of
“plural” as component parts of the two words noses
and were.

The Morse code uses two signalling units, ‘mark’
and “space,” differing in one dimension; or it can be
considered as using four units, “‘dot,” “dash,” “space,”
and “‘letter-space,”’ different in two dimensions, namely
electrical intensity (or polarity) and duration. On the
other hand, every known language uses more than a
dozen or twenty (and less than a hundred) phonemes,
differing from each other in at least four, or more
probably at least five, dimensions. Spanish, for ex-
ample, seems to have at least nine dimensions in its
phonemic system, and English is known to have more
than Spanish.

These are so many that a complete catalog would be
boresome and confusing; but a partial listing will help

make it clear what this is all about. One of the Spanish
dimensions is ‘“vowel-versus-consonant.” Among the
five Spanish vowels, two more dimensions are clearly
evident. In one dimension, the five vowels are cate-
gorized as high, mid, and low; in the other, as front,
central, and back. /i/ and /u/ are high, /e/ and /o/ are
mid, and /a/ is low; /i/ and /e/ are front, /u/ and /o/
are back, and /a/ is neither, so it is called central. The
six category-names were borrowed from phonetics into
phonemics, just as the word ‘‘work”’ was borrowed by
physicists, and as we borrowed “plural” from every-day
terminology, where it was a synonym for ‘‘numerous.”
In phonetics they referred to tongue-position in the
mouth; in phonemics, of course, we must be careful to
strip away those denotations of the words, which have
now become distracting connotations. In phonetics it is
clear that ¢ is intermediate between 7 and a. But in
the phonemic structure of Spanish /e/ may or may not
be intermediate between /i/ and /a/ on the evidence
already presented here, for the articulatory facts are
not what we need for deciding the question. In Finnish,
for example, y is of course phonetically between 7 and u,
and @ is between e and 0; but in the phonemic system of
Finnish there is compelling evidence (the diphthongs,
for instance) to show that /i/ is between /y/ and /u/,
and /e/ is between /é/ and /o/.

Again telegraphy furnishes an analogy to show how
this works. In submarine cable use of the Morse code,
there are three signalling units, all of the same duration,
ranged in the single dimension of electrical polarity:
the land-line “dot”? becomes a positive pulse, the land-
line “dash”’ becomes a negative pulse, and the land-line
“letter-space” becomes an electrical neutral interval,
while the land-line short space drops out of the code.
In practise, the “letter-space” unit is repeated for
word-space, and repeated indefinitely (nothing is sent)
for silence, representing for example suspension of
transmission.

Now suppose we should rearrange the cable code
again, by a transposition, so that “‘dot’’ is a neutral
interval, “letter-space”’ is a positive pulse, and ‘‘dash”’ is
stlll a negative pulse. At first sight it seems that this
new code ought to work equally well, for it appears to
be mathematically equivalent to the customary cable

code. But it won’t work at all, for the reason that an —

idle period, a pause between messages or the like,
would load up the line with an unbroken sequence of
positive pulses; the line would become heavily charged,
which would block its functioning for a while when
transmission was resumed again.

The same sort of thing is found in language, though
of course we cannot explain “why.” Spanish, for ex-
ample, has as part of its design the fact that unaccented
/i/ and /u/ do not occur after a consonant before
pause (except in the queer word espiritu and perhaps a
few other rare words). This fact and a few others of
like sort will suffice to place /e/ between /i/ and /a/ in
the phonemic system of Spanish. And this is what

LANGUAGE DESIGN - 707

usually turns up; patterns like the Finnish one are
fairly rare.

A telegraphic “mark” does not signal anything by
itself. In principle, it takes an assemblage of marks and
spaces to make up a signal. Then the one-dot Morse E
is a sort of accident, what the mathematicians call a
“trivial” or “degenerate” case: it is a monatomic
molecule, like a molecule of helium.

The same is true of phonemes. Linguistic signalling is
done, not with phonemes, but with morphemes, like
either morpheme of the word zoses. It is only when the
coding has been built up at least to the morpheme level
that it is permissible to talk of “meaning.” The mor-
phemes, viewed from the phonemic level, are assemblies ;
viewed from levels of higher complexity, the morphemes
appear as unanalyzable units; viewed from the outside,
the morphemes are sub-assemblies in engineering termi-
nology. They combine into larger sub-assemblies, and
these again and again into more and more massive ones,
until a complete utterance has been built up, through a
number of stages of assembly. In the English sentence
about the councillors, at least seven stages of assembly
can be found, at least seven layers of complexity in the
coding of a fairly simple message. We shall discuss them
only summarily.

If we start with the complete utterance and break it
down by stages until we arrive at the phonemes, a pat-
tern of analysis emerges which has interesting peculi-
arities. As a whole it belongs to the category “‘sentence” ;
nothing less than all of it is thus classified ; this classifi-
cation is plainly marked by details of rhythm and
intonation which the spelling does not indicate but
which are essential structural details of English. Parts
of it belong to different classes; larger parts of it may
or may not belong to categories which smaller sub-
assemblies cannot be put into. First analysis: cut it
into the councillors and all put their glasses on their noses.
The first part goes into several categories; similarly, in
the four-unit analysis of Morse, the “‘dash’’ belongs to
the two categories ‘“‘long” and “mark.” It is a “‘noun-
phrase”’ because it fits into the sentence the same way
as a plain “noun” might, such as the word councillors,
its further analysis will of course agree with this, for
example it contains a ‘‘noun” and the word the, and such
combinations generally make up noun-phrases. It is an
“actor-expression,” so marked by the absence of any
other candidate for the job, while the rest of the
sentence, the “action-expression,” can use one and will
cause anything to be so classified which is not marked
as having a different value: this one is rather marked
as probably being an “‘actor-expression” by the fact
that it is a “noun-phrase” and stands first, and its
classification as an “‘actor-expression” is not forbidden
by any such mark as the s of man’s. Hence it is
“common” rather than “possessive,”’ although it is not
marked as such, as the words man and men are: the
apostrophe of councillor’s or councillors’ belongs to
spelling, not to the language. Therefore the final s here

marks it as belonging to the “plural” category; this is
at least not forbidden by the form put, while puts
would refuse to fit it; therefore, when we later analyze
the “action-expression”’ we shall classify put as “plural,”’
whereupon it will be seen that put is not marked as
either “present” or “‘past,’’ while pués would have been
marked as “present.’’ It is marked as “definite” by the
presence of the in it; being “definite,” it will fit a
“plural” “‘action-expression” containing the word all
used as it is here, which at least some “indefinite”
“actor-expressions”’ will not fit, for instance some coun-
cillors. In summary, this the councillors is a “common
definite plural noun-phrase” functioning here as an
“actor-expression”; it will not do simply to call it a
“common definite plural noun-phrase actor-expression”’
because then ‘‘common”’ would be rendered redundant
by “actor-expression.”” On the other hand, “actor-
expression” is not made redundant by “‘common,” for
“common rather than possessive” will fit other cate-
gories besides ‘‘actor-expression,” as in I met the coun-
cillors. It is precisely such asymmetries, found every-
where in language, which makes our analysis possible
and keeps our arguments from being circular. The
reader may check through this paragraph for other
asymmetries and see how they were taken advantage of.

Second analysis: cut the councillors into the and
councillors. The reader can set up the discussion himself
on the model of the preceding paragraph.

Third analysis: cut councillors into councillor and s.
Now councillor looks like a word, but not in this sen-
tence; we can call it a “stem” here; to it is added the
“morpheme”’ s. Discussion of this would use up our
space unprofitably.

Fourth analysis: cut councillor into council and or.
Either one of these is a morpheme. The first of them
looks like the one-morpheme word council (compare the
one-dot Morse £), but here it isn’t; call it a “morpheme”
and stop there. It belongs to the category of morphemes
defined by the fact that they will combine with or,
and possibly to other categories similarly defined by
possibilities of combination, for example it will com-
bine with s to make either the possessive singular
council’s or the plural councils or councils’. It will be
noted that these criteria of classification are essentially
of the same sort as those used in our first analysis, but
now the categories are different ones.

Fifth analysis: we may or may not choose to break
council into two syllables, but it appears that we can
never get any profit out of doing so in English, so we
cut it at once into seven phonemes—by an odd accident,
the same as the number of letters in the spelling—by a
single act of analysis.

Now we have arrived at the phoneme level, and no
further analysis is called for by the kind of procedure
we have been following. We can classify the phonemes
into different categories of vowels and consonants, as
was done above for Spanish. Then we could, if we
chose, treat these intersecting categories as component

708 M.

parts, and this work, known as ‘‘componential analysis,”
is done by some linguists. But although possible, this
procedure does not often shed any light on the higher
organization of the language, and for this reason even
the practitioners of componential analysis normally use
phonemic writing, not componential transcription, in
preference to the orthographic style in which we cited
the sentence about the councillors. Hence we may as
well stop here and say that we have reached the lowest
level of analysis when we have split council into seven
phonemes. Here it was called the fifth analysis; to get
to the bottom of the second half of the same sentence
would have required going to a seventh analysis. This is
the reason why it would be better to start numbering
from the bottom, and to speak rather of successive
sytitheses, from phonemes up to the complete utterance,
reaching different heights in different parts of it.

Now we note that each act of analysis except the
bottom one was a dichotomy, a cutting into just two
parts, never into three or more by a single step. And
this has been found to be the best style of analysis in
all languages, from the complete utterance down to the
morpheme level; but in breaking morphemes up into
phonemes, any number of components is possible from
one on up. This looks like it might be connected with
the point that “meaning” has nothing to do with
phonemes, but belongs to the morphemics and higher
levels; and this is conceivably connected with the
functioning of the brain as a binary computer, but we
daren’t go into such matters.

Within an English morpheme some sequences of
phonemes are forbidden. For example, what is com-
monly spelled ou (as in council) is never followed by
p, 6, f, v, or m. We have already pointed out, with
illustrations from Spanish and Finnish, how such re-
strictions enable us to assign a shape to the phonemic
system and define its categories. This one, for instance,
defines the “‘labial” class of English consonants. We
have shown further that analogous restrictions apply
at every level of analysis up to the complete utterance.
Above the level of the phonemic system, these restric-
tions define for us the “grammar” of the language, and
all without reference to what is popularly thought of as
the “meaning,” namely the popular categorizations of
continuous reality such as “nose” or “numerous,”’ just
as we find it expedient to define the phonemic system
independently of the phonetician’s categorizations of
continuous speech.

Could we perhaps do something further with ‘‘mean-
ing”’ inside linguistics? Yes, but only on condition that

JOOS

we distinguish sharply between the inside and the
outside. Let the sociologists keep the outside or practical
meaning; then we can undertake to describe the pure
linguistic meaning. We can do it thus:

Among permissible combinations of morphemes, some
are commoner than others. Thus there are conditional
probabilities of occurrence of each morpheme in context
with others. The conditional probability of a forbidden
occurrence is of course zero and drops out of the picture.
If we ever found a conditional probability of one, we
should decide that we had made a miscalculation, and
that what we thought was composed of two morphemes
was really unanalyzably one morpheme.

Now the linguist’s “meaning” of a morpheme (or of a
combination thereof, of any complexity up to a com-
plete utterance, which might even be a whole book or
poem) is by definition the set of conditional probabilities
of its occurrence in context with all other morphemes—
of course without inquiry into the outside, practical, or
sociologist’s meaning of any of them. Of course all zero
probabilities drop out of the set automatically; and in
practise we should neglect all very small probabilities.
So far we have done almost nothing with pure linguistic
“‘meaning” as so defined, for the obvious reason that its
mathematics is of the continuous sort, which we are
not accustomed to handling—continuous by statistical
derivation from discreteness, but still unmanageable, $o
far, under our working-habits. Still, a beginning hits
been made on a structural semantics by one linguist.
He replaces all small conditional probabilities by ze®,
and all large ones by one, so as to get a discrete mathe-
matics again, in which he can work with synonymy
that is absolute by definition. This work is very recertt,
and is the most exciting thing that has happened in
linguistics for quite a few years; in spite of its theoretical
flaw, it has produced some very elegant and illuminating
results.

We can close with a general characterization of
linguistics and language. Most well-known mathemati-
cal maps are connected with the real world by a single
intuitive bridge; linguistics is connected with reality by
two of them, so that language makes a real noise corre-
spond to a real thing or the like. This defines language
as symbolic. Overt acts of speech alter reality in that
changes in listener’s behavior correspond to them. This
defines speech as communication. The technique is
organized, patterned, as disclosed by linguistic science.
This defines language as systematic. Altogether, then,
we have defined a language as a symbolic communica-
tion system, or in one word, as a “‘code.”’
