EDUCATIONAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL MEASUREMENT
VOL. XX, No. 1, 1960




    THE APPLICATION OF ELECTRONIC COMPUTERS
                      TO FACTOR 1
                                ANALYSIS
                           HENRY F. KAISER
                           University of Illinois

  IN one sense, it is appropriate that I should go first on this sym-
posium. For my topic is electronic computers in factor analysis-
and factor analysis may properly be said to be that technique in
psychology for which computers were first used and are unquestion-
ably the most used today. Thus, relatively, I shall be talking about
a more traditional, better established, and consequently perhaps

more stodgy and less exciting application of computers to psy-

chological problems.
   Let me warn you about how I am going to talk today. I have not
conducted a survey of available computer programs for factor ana-
lytic computations, nor have I done an analysis of the problems of
the application of computers to factor analysis in any way that
could be considered scientific. I am saying that I shall ask you to
listen to my opinions about the applications of computers to factor
analysis and only hope that these opinions and anecdotes make some
sense. My qualification for presuming to ask you to listen to these
ruminations is purely quantitative: I imagine that I am guilty of
having carried out more factor analytic calculations of the theo-
retical sort on electronic computers than anyone walking the earth.

                          Practical Application
  While almost my entire paper is going to be about the implications
of computers for the theory of factor analysis, allow me to devote a

  1 A
      paper read at the symposium, "Applications of Computers to Psychologi-
cal Problems," under the chairmanship of Cletus J. Burke, annual meeting of
the American Psychological Association, Cincinnati, September 7, 1959.
  I am most indebted to Professor N. L. Gage for criticizing a draft of this
paper.
                                     141
142   EDUCATIONAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL MEASUREMENT

paragraph to the implications of computers for a factor-analytic
practitioner. Although very important, I think the main thing to be
said here is so obvious that we need not linger over it. With a com-
puter one does not need to spend endless hours hanging away on a
desk calculator or on punched card mechanical pomputers. Or, he
does not need to hire, at great expense, a vast corps of clerks to
carry out these efforts. Some implications of this relief from drudgery
seem equally obvious. An investigator can think great thoughts about

psychological and scientific problems free from inhibitions generated
by purely practical computing difficulties. Also, so-called research
can really no longer be based on long hours of hard work; it is much
more difficult these days to set graduate students off in a corner

clubbing out centroids as an excuse for their not producing a
thoughtful thesis.
   The other side of the coin with respect to the ease of calculations
brought about by electronic computers is that investigators unques-
tionably are scientifically much less careful with data. Back in the
Dark Ages before computers, a researcher would do some very seri-
ous psychologizing before he increased the scope of his study-when
he realized that it would add perhaps weeks to the drudgery of com-
puting ; nowadays, unfortunately, he can add unrationalized varia-
bles to his matrices without blinking an eye. This seems undesirable,
of course. I have also heard it said that it is undesirable that students
no  longer have the opportunity for that &dquo;good for the soul&dquo; plugging
away-really doing the deed on a desk calculator. Things aren’t like
they were in the good old days when we really had to work and
appreciate our factor analyses. I consider this argument specious. As
I go on shortly to more theoretical matters, I shall argue most
strongly that those factor analytic computations which are desira-
ble are impossible to do on desk calculators; only undesirable pro-
cedures may be attacked with a desk machine. It is not &dquo;good for
one’s soul&dquo; by hand to invert matrices, find principal axes, and rotate
analytically-things which form the very basis of factor analysis
in this enlightened era; these are impossible to compute by hand.

                               Theory
  Let me turn now to my main topic, the implications for the theory
of factor analysis arising from electronic computers. It is sufficient
to think of the theoretical questions of factor analysis as belonging
                            HENRY F. KAISER                                143

to two essentially independent problems. The first of these is deter-
mining an &dquo;interesting&dquo; factor space-different from the original test
space. Under this are subsumed both the communality problem and
the question of the number of factors. The second major problem is
determining a vector basis for this &dquo;interesting&dquo; factor space. Under
this are subsumed both the question of arbitrary factoring and the
problem of rotation.
                              Communalities
   In this order then, first consider the communality problem. Over
the years Professor Guttman, in a series of brilliant papers, has
developed the entire mathematical model of factor analysis from
the scientifically and psychologically satisfying inferential view-
point of sampling variables from a universe of psychological content.
This algebraically more complicated formulation, but scientifically
more insightful one, has led to a rather straightforward proof that

the communality of a variable is the squared multiple correlation of
this variable on the remaining variables in the universe of content.
That is, the communality is the limiting squared multiple correla-
tion on the infinite number of other variables to which we are at-
tempting to draw psychometric inferences. Now squared multiple
correlations, of course, involve inverting the correlation matrix.
Additionally, Guttman essentially proved ’way back in 1940, that
for the factor analytic approach to be appropriate, it is sufficient
that the inverse of the correlation matrix in the limit becomes diag-
onal. Inverting many empirical matrices, I have found that this con-
dition apparently is also necessary: if the inverse of the correlation
matrix under consideration deviates wildly from diagonal form,
subsequent operations will often lead to trouble and confusion. Thus,
both these important contributions to the theory of factor analysis
computationally are centered about the inverse. This is my first
example of the application of computers to factor analysis. Gutt-
man’s well-appreciated, but formerly little-used ideas are now
coming to light applicationally through their necessary adjunct, the
ability to find results to go with the algebraic theorems with which
he has provided us.
   Very closely related to the mathematical model of factor analysis
is a mathematical model which Guttman calls image theory or
analysis. A couple of years ago it occurred to me that one of the
144   EDUCATIONAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL MEASUREMENT

matrices involved in image theory represented an ideal approxi-
mation to a common-factor space. Again, we must invert the ob-
served correlation matrix, and, since I had a computer available, I
was able to try out my ideas in great quantity-something which
would have been but an idle dream without a computer. Indeed, as
a result of these extensive empirical efforts, I am well convinced that
this image theoretical approach to the communality problem is
essentially unimprovable.
   Also with regard to communalities, allow me to give a small exam-
ple of how computers can sometimes be an effective substitute for
mathematics. Three years ago Professor Tryon and I developed what
looked like an exact solution for the communality problem. This was
truly exciting; we had finally found the Pot of Gold. After much
arm-waving, the technique boiled down mathematically and compu-
tationally to inverting a matrix iteratively until the communalities
were solved for. (Conceptually we were concerned with taking the

squared multiple in the limit.) However, neither Tryon nor I was
able to prove that this procedure converged to the &dquo;true&dquo; communal-
ities. I then turned to a machine and after having computed actually
four or five million squared multiple correlations, I gave up. Our
approach, ultimately, was a glamorous failure. Not completely
though: in rehashing why in the long pull it had failed to converge,
I had impressed upon me the simple proof of why the communality
problem as classically stated is insolvable.
                           Number of Factors                                    ,




   Now consider the closely interlocked problem of the number of
factors. It would appear that there have been four distinguishable
bases for determining the number of factors. In order of increasing
importance these are (1) statistical criteria of significance, (2) alge-
braic criteria of necessity, (3) psychometric criteria of reliability,
 (4) psychological criteria of meaningfulness. Let me discuss each of
these in this same order.
   For those of you who have been browbeaten by the imprecations
of second-rate statisticians into thinking that a significance test for
the number of common factors is essential to the proper application
of factor analysis, I can only say that electronic computers are an
absolute necessity to carrying out such logically inappropriate sta-
tistical tests. The statistically correct but scientifically issue-con-
                        HENRY F. KAISER                           145

fusing significance tests of Lawley and Company require, I have
been told, matrix inversion, and eigenvector-eigenvalue problems of
the worst sort-things not ever done on anything but electronic
computers.
   Professor Guttman, in establishing some algebraically necessary
conditions for common factor analysis, has provided us with the
most important paper yet published on the number-of-factors ques-
tion. More specifically, Guttman has found criteria for determining
a lower bound for the number of factors. His universally strongest
lower bound requires that we find the number of positive latent roots
of the observed correlation matrix with squared multiples in the
diagonal. An alternative lower bound-weaker than the onejust
mentioned-requires that we find the number of latent roots greater
than one of the observed correlation matrix. I have systematically
studied the first of these lower bounds through the use of a computer
and have gotten results which surprised even Professor Guttman:
it almost invariably is necessary-in the strict algebraic sense-to
have more than half as many factors as there are variables in the
study. This is not a very delightful result-considering the well-
known results regarding unique communalities. I have also studied
somewhat systematically Guttman’s other lower bound for the num-
ber of factors, the number of eigenvalues greater than one of the
observed correlation matrix. This typically runs from a sixth, say,
to a third, of the number of variables.
   The reason for studying this second lower bound with some care
has to do with the next criterion for the number of factors, psycho-
metric reliability. Very recently, I have worked out all of the formu-
las for the Kuder-Richardson reliability of factors. One remarkably
simple result is that for a principal component to have positive
Kuder-Richardson reliability, it is necessary and sufficient that the
associated eigenvalue be greater than one-a finding corresponding
exactly to Guttman’s algebraic lower bound.
   And, finally, from the fourth, and by far most important view-
point for choosing the number of factors-psychological meaning-
fulness-I have found that the number of eigenvalues greater than
one of the observed correlation matrix led to a number of factors

corresponding almost invariably, in a great number of studies, to
the number of factors which practicing psychologists were able to
interpret.
146   EDUCATIONAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL MEASUREMENT

  Summarizing then, allow me to suggest a &dquo;best&dquo; answer to the
question of the number of factors: it is the number of latent roots
greater than one of the observed correlation matrix. This conclu-
sion is based on the relatively independent criteria of algebraic
necessity, psychometric reliability, and psychological meaningful-
ness. This best answer to this perennial question is not an attempt
to say how many factors there are in the universe of psychological
content-for the answer to this theoretical question is obviously that
the number of factors in any psychological domain is infinite. I am
just presenting an answer which will provide one with a basis for
finding that number of factors which may be yielded necessarily,
reliably, and meaningfully-from the data at hand. And this result,
which you can perhaps see that I am somewhat enchanted by, has
come about only through an extensive application of electronic com-

puters ; even Professor Guttman’s mathematical genius is incapable
of grinding out inverses and eigenvalues in the bushelsful that were
necessary to reach this conclusion.

                                      Factoring
   Let us turn then to the second major problem of factor analysis:
that of determining a &dquo;best&dquo; basis for the common factor space al-
ready found. This problem, of course, proceeds in two stages: first,
an arbitrary factoring, and then a rotation to a purportedly &dquo;psy-

chologically interesting&dquo; position. As for this first stage, electronic
computers have provided us with a theoretically most desirable way
of doing business. This is simple and not at all subtle: rather than
use the vastly inferior centroid method, we may turn to the ideal

procedure, Hotelling’s method of principal axes. For reasons which
have completely escaped me, the particularly simple distinction just
made seems to have caught on slowly. Eventually, of course, be-
cause of the impact of electronic computers, the centroid method will
die. From a theoretical point of view, the quicker this demise, the
better.

                                 Rotation
  Once we have an arbitrary basis, then we may turn to the prob-
lem of rotation-that particular question in factor analysis for which
computers relatively have probably had the greatest effect. For,
before the advent of computers, rotations were always carried out
                         HENRY F. KAISER                            147

on a   subjective, graphical basis. Scientifically, of course, this was
nonsense, and perhaps led, more than anything else, to a bad name
for factor analysis among professional mathematicians and statis-
ticians. Amazingly, in 1953 and 1954 a number of investigators-
Carroll, Neuhaus and Wrigley, Saunders, and Ferguson-independ-
ently and essentially simultaneously suddenly brought forth the first
analytic criteria for rotation-mathematical statements through the
use of to-be-optimized criterion functions of the loadings. Addi-

tionally, Professor Wrigley had the foresight to realize immediately
that these ideas absolutely required the services of a computer, and,
using the recently completed Illiac at the University of Illinois
together with thejim-dandy name &dquo;quartimax&dquo; for his criterion,
started pouring forth purely objective analytic rotational solutions
by the ton. This would have been impossible without a computer.
Subsequently, the development of analytic criteria for rotation has
been very rapid. In 1955 I first proposed the so-called varimax cri-
terion for analytic rotation in the orthogonal case, a criterion that-
so I’ve been told-appears to be the essentially satisfactory answer
for analytic orthogonal solution. Quartimax and varimax are
child’s play on a computer-easily accomplished even on medium-
speed machines. However, the completely general analytic solution
for the case of the oblique factors has been a more difficult nut to
crack. The original, and subsequently major contributor to this field,
Professor Carroll, has produced a series of papers interspersed with
some efforts of mine which together seem to be zeroing in on a final

general solution to the rotation problem. Computationally, the
oblique case is extremely difficult and time-consuming. Later in
these meetings I shall give my latest attack at this problem-a
possible improvement of Professor Carroll’s most recent aff air-
which computationally requires for a reasonably sized problem solv-
ing hundreds of latent root and vector problems of not inconse-
quential difficulty.
   These approaches to the rotation problem-and the whole per-
spective which brought them about-would probably never have
occurred without the atmosphere created by the potentialities of
electronic computers. While computers can’t think-as the saying
goes-they certainly are able to disinhibit us so that we may dream
those voluptuous dreams which in an earlier era would have been
only computational nightmares.
148   EDUCATIONAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL MEASUREMENT

                             Main Point
   I come then to what I would consider the single major point of
this presentation. Factor analysis will eventually come out of the
realm of a strange, mystical, ad hoc, half-art, half-science sort of
numerology into the camp of reputable methodologies because of the
possibility of attacking factor-analytic problems in a mathemati-
cally respectable fashion through the use of high-speed computers.
Factor analysis, in the past, has been much criticized technically
because of the cloacal short-cuts that have been imposed upon it
by computational considerations. However, scientifically unspeak-
able methods of determining the number of common factors, of
approximating communalities, of factoring, and of rotation can now
fortunately be thought of as a dying witness to the ingenuity of
earlier factor analysts in avoiding impossible computational prob-
lems.
  In this vein, I might add that one of the major present deterrents
to the full utilization of electronic computers in factor analysis is
the error of attempting to adapt some of these antique methods to
an electronic computer. For example, it strikes me as inane to use

Tucker’s or Coombs’ technique for guessing at the number of factors
now that the powerful methods of Louis Guttman are feasible. Other

techniques such as using the highest in the column for a communality
approximation, the centroid method, and graphical rotation, belong
to an earlier era, and it is a travesty on computers and on science
to continue to use them.


                              Programs
   My next topic will be of a somewhat paternalistic sort: I shall
suggest to those of you who arejust building, or thinking of build-
ing, a library of programs for factor analytic purposes, some sort of
priority of effort.
   First, of course, the most basic program of all is that for deter-
mining intercorrelational matrices. This need not detain us, since
it is an extremely easy program to write (good for beginners to get
started on) and is indeed merely a data-processing problem which
does not take full advantage of a high-speed electronic computer.
   A second program to write, and probably the most important and
most difficult, is matrix inversion for real, symmetric, positive defi-
                         HENRY F. KAISER                            149

nite matrices. An inverse program is of pre-eminent importance for
a number of reasons. I have already alluded to Guttman’s proof that

it was sufficient for factor analytic purposes in the inferential sense
that the inverse of a correlation matrix tend to be diagonal. Again
referring to Guttman’s work, obtaining inverses is necessary for
finding the squared multiple correlations as a best approximation to
the communalities, and, with respect to Guttman’s work on neces-
sary conditions, the inverse is essential for finding the universally
strongest lower bound for the number of common factors. After
rotating analytically, our solution, for mathematical reasons, is
invariably in terms of the reference vector system of axes. It may
be said that the primary factor axes are the preferable system of
coordinates, and to provide the necessary transformation a matrix
must be inverted. Finally an inverse program is essential for the
important-and most neglected-problem in factor analysis, that
of obtaining factor scores.
   The third thing to program for factor analytic purposes on a com-
puter is the principal axes method of factoring. There are, speaking
very generally, two methods for doing the deed here, one due basi-
cally to Jacobi and the other to Hotelling. For factor analytic pur-
poses Hotelling’s method-involving iterated multiplication of a
matrix by a vector-probably should have priority since in the arbi-
trary factoring of a correlation matrix we usually wish to get only
a few of the largest principal axes, something Hotelling’s method

allows us to do. A program for finding principal axes by Jacobi’s
method through sine-cosine transformations should also be in the
library. Jacobi’s method in every respect but one seems superior to
Hotelling’s; it is faster per root and vector, it is less temperamental
-grinding out solutions in an easily predictable time-and it is
probably easier to program. Its one disadvantage is that it requires
finding all roots simultaneously, something which often is not desir-
able in factor analysis, where we are usually interested in minimizing
or maximizing a function, or getting just the dominant factors.

   The fourth factor analytic procedure that I would recommend
programming is the varimax criterion for analytic rotation. As indi-
cated above, this seems to accomplish the purpose of rotating
orthogonally in an essentially satisfactory manner-no one has
seriously complained to me yet. It now appears that such a program
for the rotation problem will be of more or less permanent usefulness.
150   EDUCATIONAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL MEASUREMENT
  I am somewhat at a loss to make suggestions for writing programs
for analytic criteria for the general oblique case. The oblique case
is presently in a state of ferment; no one has yet written a com-
pletely satisfactory analytic criterion for oblique rotation. I have
hopes that the thing I shall later present at these meetings is an
improvement over methods now on the market, but it is not yet what
could be considered a &dquo;perfect&dquo; answer. Additionally, programs for
the presently available oblique analytic criteria for rotation are very
difficult to write; tentatively, I might suggest that it would be wise
to delay writing such programs until the present fermentation settles
down to a more permanently potable solution.
   These programs I have just suggested could provide a complete
system of factor analysis. For example, find all principal components
with associated latent roots greater than one, rotate these according
to the varimax criterion, and exactly calculate factor scores for indi-
viduals through the matrix inversion program.

                      Medium-Speed Computers
   I should now like to turn to a topic about which I intend to speak
intemperately. I should like briefly to comment on medium-speed
electronic computers-of which the IBM 650 is the pre-eminent
example. With the insufferable arrogance of one who has almost
always dealt with high-speed computers, I should like to go on
record as saying that medium-speed computers such as the IBM 650
are a positive detriment to the theoretical development of factor

analysis. I consider them an anathema-machines which detract
from theoretical progress while grinding out necessarily primitive
solutions in immense quantities. These strong words stem from the
point of view I have been taking for the last 10 or 15 minutes. You
simply cannot, with these medium-speed electronic computers, do
any of the things which are theoretically desirable in factor analysis
-with the possible exception of rotating analytically under the
restriction of orthogonality. You cannot invert large matrices on a
medium-speed computer; you most certainly cannot compute princi-
pal axes of reasonably sized matrices; and you could never rotate
analytically in the general oblique case except for the very smallest
problems. Thus with machines of which the IBM 650 is prototypical,
the methods currently used-like repulsive centroid factoring, after
garbage approximation of communalities and noisome determination
                         HENRY F. KAISER                           151

of the number of factors-can, out of this slime, briefly rise to
respectability through analytic criteria for rotation-as long as one
maintains the sometimes undesirable restriction of orthogonality.
The only conditions under which I could ever abide a medium-speed
computer would be, after robbing a bank, buying my own and run-
ning it night and dayjust for my own problems. These incontinent
words are for those of you who are contemplating procuring a
medium-speed computer-or are self-satisfied with your presently
completed library of programs for a medium-speed computer.
                             Conclusion
   To conclude, allow me to repeat and rephrase my major point.
In spite of the fact that computers have long been used successfully
in factor analysis, the implications of electronic computers to factor
analysis are still on the horizon: through their use, we will in the
future more fully be able to capitalize on the before-his-time mathe-
matical and scientific genius of Louis Guttman, the before-his-time
statistical genius of Harold Hotelling, and perhaps most important,
allow us to continue to translate and interpret the inspired intuitive
scientific genius of L. L. Thurstone.
