APPLIED STOCHASTIC MODELS AND DATA ANALYSIS, VOL. 8, 7-16 (1992)

SEMANTICS AND FACTOR ANALYSIS: AN APPROACH TO THE
INTERPRETATION OF FACTORS
B. F. LARA, E. TARTAS AND P. OYARZABAL
University of Laitsanne, HEC, BFSHI Cff-IOIS Lausanne, Switzerland

SUMMARY
The interpretation of factors constitutes a major problem in factor analysis. Until now the underlying
semantic aspects of the question have been studied only occasionally. However, there are some
indications that the mechanical interpretation of the results may constitute in the immediate future a real
need in the realm of very large problems. On the other hand, the semantic study of multivariate statistical
methods is the only way to warrant the validity of the mechanization procedures and the means to
identify their limits.
K E Y WORDS Semantics

Factor analysis Induction Multivalued logic

1. SETTING BOUNDARIES FOR FACTOR ANALYSIS

Generally speaking, the various methods of multivariate statistical analysis (MSA) endeavour
to explain the variance of the sample, seeking the underlying pattern of relationships or
grouping either the phenotypic variables or the observations.
Factor analysis (FA) methods are very much in tune with the standards and epistemological
constraints of modern scientific reasoning, although they d o not fully encompass the whole set
o f requirements to such an extent as to replace the logical methods of induction.
What the family of multivariate statistical analysis methods surely does is to extend and
complement the panoply of the logician’s tools in particular for inductive reasoning, inasmuch
as it provides very illuminating inferences over data collections. In spite of that the results of
MSA methods lie only midway between the raw empirical facts and the ideas or theoretical
constructs.
Looking in more detail at the flurry of techniques which are available today, one may
wonder why there are so many for performing apparently the same tasks. The very existence
o f this fairly large set of methods reveals a certain ‘malaise’ and clearly testifies to the existence
of various obstacles that undermine the application of MSA to real-life experiments in many
cases.
The main problems the user has to face are schematically presented in the following.
1.1. The entrenchment of the universe of discourse
It is obvious that the minimum criterion we should afford for ensuring the validity of any
statistical treatment is that the collection of data be neither artificially truncated nor blatantly

8755-0024/ 92/010007- 1O$ I 0.00
(91992 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Received 4 March 1991

B. F. LARA, E. TARTAS AND P . OYARZABAL

incomplete. Moreover, the sample set should ideally represent all the various instances or
situations and all the aspects-or relevant attributes-of the phenomenon under study.
However, it often happens that the chosen set of phenotypic variables constitutes merely a
subset of the overall set of significant variables required for the intended explanatory purposes.
Somewhat in this connection, the Alpha factoring techniques purport to define a set of
factors that have a maximum of generalizability, as measured by the Cronach alpha or by the
Kuder-Richardson reliability index, the objective being to make reliable inferences about the
universe of variables based on a sample of them.
Other techniques, such as image factoring (Guttman) approximate the closely related
problem of the estimation of communalities. But the validity of this approach relies again on
how well and to what extent the a priori selected set of variables represents the semantically
meaningful universe of discourse.

1.2. The interpretation of factors
Each line of the factor matrix F exhibits the canonical correlations existing between each
phenotypical variable and the extracted factors. Consequently, the factor loadings in principle
should provide the analyst with the essential clues for the interpretation of the factors
underlying the data.
But the job of interpretation which has to be carried out by the human analyst proves very
often to be highly sensitive, tedious and sometimes unsatisfactory.
The trouble is that the underlying dimensions of the same sample may be defined in many
ways. All of them are statistically valid, since one factor solution can be transformed onto
another without violating any basic assumption. The trouble arises because not all are equally
meaningful and useful for practical purposes.
Let us put aside the otherwise important question of whether we have to start with the
covariance matrix or with the correlation matrix-and the question of whether or not to
replace the 1’s of the diagonal by the estimated communalities. There still remains the choice
of the rotational procedure: either orthogonal (varimax, quartimax, equimax) or oblique.
Orthogonal factors are simpler t o handle, whereas the oblique ones are usually considered
to be more realistic, although there does not seem to exist a strong logical justification for this
assumption.
Short of being able to propose an univocal and unambiguous way of uncovering the truly
useful factors, some authors (e.g. Harman’ and previously Thurstone’) have suggested a
couple of rules of thumb in order to decide whether the resulting structure-after a given
rotation-is adequate or not. The rationale of these criteria is very simple and it is guided by
geometrical but not epistemologically rigorous speculations:
(a) many points must lie near the factor axes;
(b) a small number of points should appear t o be removed from the axes; and
(c) a large number of points must lie near the origin, if there are many factors.
In spite of the abundance of techniques, at the end of the exercise the analyst is left alone
under the burden of having to choose among several possibilities, and without the certainty
of reaching the right results, namely those which convey a real semantic meaning. Even worse,
this confusing situation leads many people to arbitrary interpretations, specially when lacking
a real insight and a deep understanding of the subject of the enquiry.

10990747, 1992, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/asm.3150080103 by University Of Alberta, Wiley Online Library on [19/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

8

9

1.3. Instability of the results
Sampling errors and incompleteness of the set of phenotypic variables tend to generate the
instability of the eigenvalues and eigenvectors and, consequently, of the rotated or unrotated
factor loadings.
The effect of the coding of data may possibly somewhat spoil the resulting configurations.
These perturbations are not surprising whenever the metric of the scales is either heterogeneous
or not given in a homogeneous fashion. In some circumstances, the simple fact of taking
logarithms of the value demonstrate how much a change of scale may distort the emerging
structure.
The quantification of the variability of principal components had preoccupied the
statisticians for many years. Some of them calculate confidence intervals assuming a normal
distribution for the first principal component. Little is known however about the second
component and the higher ones.
As far as the analysis of correspondences is concerned, M . G. Kendall and A. Stuart
suggested that the lambda values follow a chi-square distribution as the overall variance of the
sample, but H.O. Lancaster has again disputed this assumption.
At any rate, the recent bootstrap techniques allow us to cope-at least partially-with this
problem and to calculate the statistical moments of the distribution of any parameter we want,
without assuming any distribution (Diaconis and Effron). By all means it remains a fact that
the factor loadings are not fixed values as we would have preferred, but only the more or less
biased estimation of a value which follows a probabilistic function of unforseeable nature.

2. A LINGUISTIC APPROACH
When the analyst attempts to interpret the factors, what he does is to try to assign meanings
to these factors on the basis of correlations exhibited by the matrix and relating the original
variables to factors. In the search for meanings, the analyst is guided in a more or less explicit
manner by an underlying theory of the phenomenon previously existing in his mind. (In this
context the word ‘theory’ is understood in its very etymological sense, namely ‘a look at
something’. This may be a well constructed set of scientifically sound statements or a
postulational model, or even a loose and intuitive body of knowledge.)
Let L be a first order language in which the theory T is stated. In our case, having to deal
with data of a statistical nature we must distinguish between necessary and contingent truth.
The latter is attached to the probabilistic statements, and is linked with the very notion of
‘possible worlds’.
Intentional logics such as modal logics contains notions like that of ‘possible worlds’.
For good reasons, the set of constants of language L is restricted to properties. Properties
play an indispensable role in our understanding of world phenomena. These properties are
merely the natural language adjectives that we use attributively. In particular, one can assign
a predicate to each instance of phenotypic variable and to each intended factor.
The semantic structure of predicates is a major topic of linguists and logicians. 3 g 4 9 5 , 6 Leaving
aside important questions, specifically the question of fine-grainedness of predicates, we need
to define a structure for the whole set of predicates choosing among the many possible ways.
Meanings require polymorphic structuring, as they appear to exist in different categories that
go far beyond the standard type theory.

10990747, 1992, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/asm.3150080103 by University Of Alberta, Wiley Online Library on [19/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

SEMANTICS A N D FACTOR ANALYSIS

B. F. LARA, E. TARTAS AND P . OYARZABAL

A possibility could be to define a topological space, issued from an adequate set of axioms.
Another way-which we have chosen here for the sake of simplicity-is t o follow the
aristotelian schema of a kind of Porphyrius tree defined by means of a cascade of genera and
differentiae.
Accordingly, we could figure out a graph structure of predicates, i.e. a collection of distinct
nodes representing the predicates related t o the phenomenon, together with an unspecified
number of lines representing an ordering relationship defined over predicates.
If we assume with Russell that each constant y , representing an individual, may be
considered as a bundle of properties (located somewhere in the preceding nodes of the graph),
it turns out that the terminal nodes of the graph correspond to the individuals or observations
of the initial statistical tableau. Hence they are at the lower layer of depth n. The ordering
relationship establishes that predicates associated with a given node entail (extensively) all
other predecessors corresponding to predecessor nodes in the graph structure. Consequently
the predicates x related to the phenotypic variables will be located at level n - 1. The factors
should be found somewhere at levels lower than n - 1 (or equal to n - 1). Let Il be a nonempty set of predicates

n = (Ti)= ( ( X I ,( Z l , . * . )
where X = ( x i ) and Z = (a,) and let I’ be the underlying graph structure for these predicates.
Note that it is not needed t o give the full graph structure in an explicit manner.
One theory relative to the phenomenon requires a set of objects-a local ontology
(LeniCwski, Quine, Hintikka)-and an ideology defined as the set of conceptual tools needed
to describe these objects.
Sentences of the theory are stated with the help of a formal language L containing in
addition t o the symbols related t o the predicates, the familiar logical connectives
l, A, V, = , -. Formally, the set of sentences belonging to L constitutes S L , according to the
following rules:
(i) if rI; E n then +IE
;SL;
(ii) if a E SL and 6 E SL then ( a A 0)E SL
The last rule applies also to other connectives.
Still, we will extend the language L to L + , by adding the necessitation connectives of a
muitivalued modal logic:

o a is read as ‘ a is necessary’
o a is read as ‘ a is possible’
0 2 a is read as ‘ a is very possible’
(Note the modifier).
Example: For a , ,8 E SL, 0 ’ ( 0 1 A P ) stands for ‘ a and P are very possible’. Intuitively
speaking, if a and ,6 are predicates the above sentence admits of the set-theoretical
interpretation: ‘the intersection of 01 and ,6 is very possible’; or, translated into terms of
extensionality: it is very possible that the individuals exist: ( jI ay and b y ) .
The formal language defined above allows one to express in formal fashion all the
hypothesized candidates of meanings attached to the factors.
For example, the meaning of an arbitrary intended factor U ~ E
C is described by means of
an S L + sentence as follows:
Uj: 0 ’(X, A Uj) A

0 (X2 A ~

j A ). _ .A ( X i A ~

j A )...

10990747, 1992, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/asm.3150080103 by University Of Alberta, Wiley Online Library on [19/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

10

11

Of course, with the help of such statements we can afford to reflect the scientific or intuitive
knowledge the analyst possesses about the phenomenon under study.

2.1. Formal statements related to the F matrix
We assume that a theory makes a distinction between:
(a) sentences intended to stipulate the meanings of the factors in terms of phenotypic
variables, via L + ;
(b) sentences intended to carry an empirical claim, via a formal translation of the
informational content of the factor matrix.
The latter sentences of analytical nature constitute a model W for L + , and hence are
considered as a canonical intensive interpretation of L + .
Example: let us take 0.9 as an arbitrary value of the element A, of the matrix F and let 0.4
be a threshold value extracted from the statistical tables for a given significance level of this
correlation coefficient. This information may be written as follows:

( M Y )xiYAajy
should be read as ‘for many individuals the predicate xi holds as well as the predicate u,’.
Where M is a quantifier that stands for ‘many’; y is an individual; x; and a, keep the same
readings as above.
In order to carry out the formal translation, we have introduced the new quantification
symbol M for ‘many’. In addition, we need the additional quantifiers S for ‘some’, the
classical A for ‘all’ and E for ‘there is a’. The introduction of M and S is obviously
appropriated in the statistical context.
Moreover, for a! an atomic sentence of the shape XjyAu,y, the quantifiers are used to
translate the real values in the interval [ - 1, 11 according to the following rules:
Rule I . ( M y ) whenever f i j 2 th-2 (square root of the threshold value).
Rule 2. ( S y ) whenever th-2 > f, 2 th.
Rule 3. Values of the matrix coefficients such that th > f i j > - th are ignored.
Rule#. Negative coefficients are translated as (My)7 and (Sy)-,, in a similar fashion.

2.2. Hintikka-style possible worlds approach
A model W for S L is an ordered pair (D,
P ) in which: D is a set (domain) of individuals
belonging to the sample; P = ( p i ) is a collection of sentences conveying the statistical
information contained in the matrix F.
The model W is a possible world, as one of the many doxastic alternatives, in our case one
of the potentially many samples that can be drawn from the statistical universe. Hintikka‘ calls
alternativity rules those rules which allow us to select among the possible worlds. Here,
reversing the Hintikka approach, we try to find the ontological definitions, as stated by S L
sentences, which are compatible with the model, as exhibited by the sentences generated
from F.
The logical adequacy (or strong compatibility) criterion states that two expressions e E S L
and e‘ E P are judged to be semantically related if their formal representations are provably
related. In other words, if the world-here the extension as expressed by e‘-is the way e E S L
says it is, then clearly e has all the information contained in e’ (and possibly more).

10990747, 1992, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/asm.3150080103 by University Of Alberta, Wiley Online Library on [19/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

SEMANTICS AND FACTOR ANALYSIS

compare expressions of type e and e’ requires the following.
A falsifiability criterion, whenever the logical axioms set are violated. In this case, the
hypothesized meaning for a factor does not correspond to, or even contradict, the
mathematical profile of the factor as given by F.
A weak identity criterion. When the expressions have the same extension, the two logical
entities may be collapsed into the same logical object (strong compatibility).
A degree of compatibility between sentences. Midway between complete verification and
falsifiability, expressions issued from the ontology and those derived from the empirical
world may often be logically compatible to different degrees.
2.3. Formal description of the procedure
Semantics associates a satisfaction relation E W , L between sentences of L + and elements of
a class W L +of L-structures for W .
If W E W L +then r=W ~ w , L +is read as saying that a is true in W or W is a model of a .
If C E SL then W is a model of C, if W is a model of every sentence a in C.
Tarski-equivalences for all W E W:
W E -p * w nf: a
W E ~ A P + + W E (and
~ WEP

(i)
(ii)

In addition:
(iii)

W ~ ( o a ) * (3W)WE W a n d W = a

The core of the procedure consists in comparing the SL sentences with the corresponding W
models. In order to do that it is useful to replace the quantifiers in the latter by modal
connectives with the help of the x quasi-equivalence operator. The replacement rules would
be:
( M y ) XjyA ujy “ 0 2 X i y A ~ j y
(Sy)XiyAUjjy = O X i y A ~ j y

(iv)
(v)

(The monadic
connective is not affected by the replacement rules).
The falsifiability, weak identity and compatibility criteria may be applied in two ways:
(1) by stating a set of axioms like the following:
O2a+

(Vi)

(vii)
(viii)

ocu

V O
1 0O2a a
* 0 lT a
2
02al 0 -p

(ix)

(2) alternatively, by defining a suitable algebra, or the equivalent truth tables; after
establishing a correspondence between multivalued truth values (3, 2, 1 , 0) and the modal
connectives ( n , o 0 , o-,), we have the tables I, I1 and 111.

’,

0

3

Table I

~y 7
2 2 2 1 0

2 3 1 0

1 1 1 1 0
0 0 0 0 0

1 1 3 0
0 0 0 3

Table I1

Table Ill

10990747, 1992, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/asm.3150080103 by University Of Alberta, Wiley Online Library on [19/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

B. F. LARA, E. TARTAS AND P. OYARZABAL

13

2.4. Algorithm

The linguistic approach described above may easily be translated in algorithmic terms in
several fashions; and it is a simple task to implement the corresponding computer programme.

3. EPISTEMOLOGICAL VALIDATION
Popper drew a line between the genuine analytic sense and nonsense. Empirical statements are
the business of modern science. The modern view of science lies in a firm rejection of the
demands of pure deductive reasoning. Empirically significant accounts fall in the domain of
empirical science because their truth or falsehood is decidable by reference to observational
data and not only to their forms or meanings alone.
Practice has widely admitted the important role of FA methods in inductive reasoning. At
first glance its empirical basis and compliance with the standards of falsifiability and
significance appear to suit modern requirements of scientific knowledge very well.
Ideally, scientific discourse about things or events is to be translated into a language.
Observational data are to be its primitive terms, in spite of the fact that they necessarily imply
hidden theoretical notions. The search for factors of FA appears coincident with the task of
finding the so-called dispositional terms (what Carnap does through reduction sentences).
However, one has to keep in mind that the role of observational data is to refute or falsify
a hypothesis and nothing more. What we get from FA is a generalization, but hardly an
explanatory theory.

3.1. Validation of linguistic approach
The operational scheme proposed above in Section 2.3 establishes a criterion of
confirmability allowing at least some selection from among hypotheses and stringent enough
to provide legitimate differentiation between contradictory inductions. Note the following:
(a) As is any non-observable predicate, a disposition term (meaning of factor) is permissible
i f eliminable by definition in terms of the observational primitives (phenotypic variables).
(b) In some way, a factor meaning or interpretation corresponds to a projectible hypothesis
rather than to a law-like induction, as Goodman pointed out when speaking about induction.
(c) The set of SL statements is tentative and expandable, in the sense that there are further
hypothesis selections that may be accounted for.
(d) A set of hypotheses for which the compatibility conditions cannot all be satisfied
simultaneously is called ‘frustrated’. When the original design of the experimentation fails, the
observational variables do not allow us to construct the ‘true’ disposition term because of the
incompleteness of the initial set of variables.
(e) When modelling the large variety of phenomena that we can handle with MSA methods,
and in order to describe world events and entities with the help of properties, we must
remember that properties are classified in two categories according to the typology of
Georgescu-Roegen and Katzner. First, the so-called ‘arithmomorphic’ properties, perfectly
capable of sharply delineating the boundaries of a given concept. In this case, numbers and
quantitative scales can be associated with these properties. That happens when the
phenomenon under study is related to the natural and metrizable world. In contrast, the

10990747, 1992, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/asm.3150080103 by University Of Alberta, Wiley Online Library on [19/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

SEMANTICS AND FACTOR ANALYSIS

B. F. LARA, E . TARTAS AND P. OYARZABAL

sociobiomorphic properties arising in the sociological contexts do not permit perfect
association with continuous scales, and therefore meanings are not unequivocally
distinguishable from their opposites.

4. NUMERICAL EXPERIMENTS

The success of any experiment based on a computer programme corresponding to the linguistic
approach described above depends heavily on the nature of the field we are dealing with. As
one would expect, the results are more encouraging in the arithmomorphic domains.
Contrarily, in the sociobiomorphic areas the main problem lies in conceptual modelling, i.e.
in stating a suitable set of intended meanings which constitute the postulational theory.
4.1. A Thrustone-inspired experiment

( I ) Suppose we are asked to extract the normalized factor matrix F from a table of N
observations defined over 10 variables: (The experiment is inspired by an idea of Thurstone.)
(2) Only after we get the results are we told that the data of the experiment consist in series
of measures corresponding to N geometric figures of the same shape.

(3) We are also told that the phenotypic variables or observational data in this particular
example represent several measurements, such as the length of three diagonals on the surface,
the volume of the figures, linear combinations of the three dimensions taken pairwise, etc.
The computer programme performs very well in assigning potential meanings t o the factors.
(Except for the first factor, which turns out to be a well-known common factor. In this
particular circumstance, the interpretation therefore requires 1 he ingenuity of a human
analyst .)
Of course, the case study of the Thurstone experiment is ideal for handling since we know
that the objects under study are identical geometric figures, i.e. abstract objects, and as with
any mathematical construct the field is perfectly closed from a semantic point of view.
Moreover, knowing that the domain is a geometrical one, we are in a position to ascertain
that the underlying formal structure is workable in terms of a topological vector space.

4.2. The sociobiomorphic domains
Let us go further by proposing a multivariate statistical study applied to the colours of a
collection of famous paintings. (It could also be the adjectives describing colours used by a
school of poets.)
Colours and shapes of objects are indeed empirically observable data and constitute for us
a shared world of reference. At first glance the human eye could be taken to resemble a T V
camera which measures how much energy is in the wavelength from each point on an image.
However the sole colour predicates, taken as physical realities, are clearly insufficient for the
operational needs of the artist, whose brain most certainly works also with other nonobservational variables.
Let us suppose first that the experiment is restricted to the pure arithmomorphic aspects of
the phenomenon of colours.
We know pretty well the underlying physical theory of colours (and even, to a certain extent,

10990747, 1992, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/asm.3150080103 by University Of Alberta, Wiley Online Library on [19/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

14

15

the physiology of colour vision). Recalling that each colour has a characteristic angle of
refraction and hence that a pure colour corresponds to light of a distinct wavelength, the basic
predicates related to the phenotypic variables could be the set X of pure colours.

X = (red, orange, yellow, green, blue, violet)
The physical theory allows us t o translate colours into arithmomorphic terms and hence the
application over the real line R is obvious
g:

x- R 6

where IR6 stands for the Cartesian product of the real values corresponding to the six pure
colours of the spectrum. The colour of a given object is therefore given by a vector on this
six-dimensional space in order t o admit different hues and combinations of colours.
(Although, according to the theory of trichromacy, most colours can be matched by a mixture
of only the three primaries.)
It is not surprising that in this reductionistic context our programme easily finds the
underlying pure or primary colours.
But coming back to the universe of discourse of the painter, it is quite clear that he associates
colours with feelings like sadness, joy, etc. and other intellectual connotations. The
formalization of his universe of discourse is not exhaustively given by the arithmomorphic
properties of the underlying physical phenomenon. Dropping the additional non-physical
linguistic variables would make it impossible to cover the operational attributes required for
the painter’s aim of communicating emotions and ideas to other people. If that were the case,
we would accept the implicit and na’ive belief that colour, unlike beauty, is uniquely and
directly determined by a mere external physical cause.
Formalization of the enlarged universe of discourse needs an enquiry into what topological
structures are suited to the description o f the underlying phenomenon.
This enquiry is worth making because we encounter the same difficulties when modelling
social and economical scenarios. Our contention is that there exists a strong analogy between
these and the colour surrogate, since the underlying brain functions must be quite similar.

5 . CONCLUSIONS
( 1 ) Phenotypic variables are used in factor analysis as a means for uncovering cryptotypic
variables which usually reveal the underlying causes or explanations of the observable
behaviour.

( 2 ) Conceptual models in the area of sociology imply in many cases a number of variables of
a sociobiomorphic nature that d o not allow measurements over either a continuous o r a
discrete scale. Depending on the field, the application of the linguistic approach will be more
or less difficult.
(3) The interpretation of factors in terms of weights of the phenotypic sample variables (or
individuals) is sometimes hazardous, and requires a good (expert) knowledge of the
phenomena. Still, the amount of work and human contribution necessary for the task of
interpretation is considerable. Many researchers in the areas of biogenetics, astrophysics and
sociology would welcome the help of some kind of automatic interpretation (or at least an
expert system of assistance), as the most suitable tool for the advancement of scientific
discovery when they are confronted by an ever increasing amount of data.

10990747, 1992, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/asm.3150080103 by University Of Alberta, Wiley Online Library on [19/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

SEMANTICS AND FACTOR ANALYSIS

B. F. LARA, E. TARTAS AND P. 0YARZABA.L

(4) Given the large amount of data available, or to be available, in such an important area
as the interpretation of polygenic characteristics in genoma decoding, the lack of adequate
multivariate techniques for dealing with large size matrices and for automatically interpreting
the results, are about t o constitute a severe bottleneck. The same situation occurs in the fields
of astrophysics and sociology. We are therefore convinced that a substantial extension of
current methodology is a major issue for the next few decades.

(5) Whereas arbitrary interpretations plague the pure experimentalist, neoanalytic linguists
may be hampered by their unfamiliarity with statistics or by their lack of a deep understanding
of the subject. Epistemology and data analysis should not progress in isolation. From the
conjunction of efforts one should expect great benefits.
Several other alternative approaches (topological, fuzzy sets theory) to the problem may be
undertaken. The present paper is only a preliminary contribution to the work. Much will need
to be done before these possibilities can be fully organized in a coherent way. Our purpose has
been to stimulate further research in this area until we build adequate algorithms, or possibly
an efficient expert system.

REFERENCES
1. H. H. Harrnan, Modern Factor Analysis, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1967.
2. L. L. Thurstone, Mulfiple-Factor Analysis, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1947.
3. G. Chierchia, er ai. (eds) Properties, Types and Meaning, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1989.
4. J. Hintikka, Models for Modalities, Reidel Publishing Co., Dordrecht, 1969.
5 . J . Hintikka, Knowledge and the Known, Reidel Publishing Co., Dordrecht, 1974.
6. E. L. Keenan and L. M. Faltz, Boolean Semantics for Nafural Language, Reidel Publishing Co., Dordrecht, 1985.

10990747, 1992, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/asm.3150080103 by University Of Alberta, Wiley Online Library on [19/04/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

16

