Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 57–78

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Memory and Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

Explaining human performance in psycholinguistic tasks with
models of semantic similarity based on prediction and
counting: A review and empirical validation
Paweł Mandera ⇑, Emmanuel Keuleers, Marc Brysbaert
Department of Experimental Psychology, Ghent University, Belgium

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 10 June 2015
revision received 4 April 2016
Available online 9 June 2016
Keywords:
Semantic model
Distributional semantics
Semantic priming
Psycholinguistic resource

a b s t r a c t
Recent developments in distributional semantics (Mikolov, Chen, Corrado, & Dean, 2013;
Mikolov, Sutskever, Chen, Corrado, & Dean, 2013) include a new class of predictionbased models that are trained on a text corpus and that measure semantic similarity
between words. We discuss the relevance of these models for psycholinguistic theories
and compare them to more traditional distributional semantic models. We compare the
models’ performances on a large dataset of semantic priming (Hutchison et al., 2013)
and on a number of other tasks involving semantic processing and conclude that the
prediction-based models usually offer a better fit to behavioral data. Theoretically, we
argue that these models bridge the gap between traditional approaches to distributional
semantics and psychologically plausible learning principles. As an aid to researchers, we
release semantic vectors for English and Dutch for a range of models together with a convenient interface that can be used to extract a great number of semantic similarity
measures.
Ó 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction
Distributional semantics is based on the idea that words
with similar meanings are used in similar contexts (Harris,
1954). In this line of thinking, semantic relatedness can be
measured by looking at the similarity between word cooccurrence patterns in text corpora. In psychology, this
idea inspired a fruitful line of research starting with Lund
and Burgess (1996) and Landauer and Dumais (1997).
The goal of the present paper is to incorporate a new family
of models recently introduced in computational linguistics
and natural language processing research by Mikolov,
Chen, Corrado, and Dean (2013) and Mikolov, Sutskever,
⇑ Corresponding author at: Ghent University, Department of Experimental Psychology, Henri Dunantlaan 2, Room 150.025, 9000 Ghent,
Belgium.
E-mail address: pawel.mandera@ugent.be (P. Mandera).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2016.04.001
0749-596X/Ó 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chen, Corrado, and Dean (2013) into psycholinguistics. In
order to do so, we will discuss the theoretical foundation
of these models and evaluate their performance on predicting behavioral data on psychologically relevant tasks.
Count and predict models
Although there are different approaches to distributional semantics, what they have in common is that they
start from a text corpus and that they often represent
words as numerical vectors in a multidimensional space.
The relatedness between a pair of words is quantified by
measuring the similarity between the vectors representing
these words.
The original computational models of semantic information (arising from the psychological literature) were
based on the idea that the number of co-occurrences of
words in particular contexts formed the basis of the multi-

58

P. Mandera et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 57–78

dimensional space and that the vectors were obtained by
applying a set of transformations to the count matrix. For
instance, Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA; Landauer &
Dumais, 1997) starts by counting how many times a word
is observed within a document or a paragraph. The Hyperspace Analogue to Language (HAL; Lund & Burgess, 1996)
counted how many times words co-occurred in a relatively
narrow sliding window, usually consisting of up to ten surrounding words. Because of the common counting step,
following Baroni, Dinu, and Kruszewski (2014) we will
refer to this family of models as count models.
In count models, the result of this first step is a word by
context matrix. What usually follows is a series of transformations applied to the matrix. The transformations involve
some kind of a weighting scheme, based on frequencyinverse document frequency, positive pointwise mutual
information (PPMI), log-entropy, and/or a dimensionality
reduction step (most commonly singular value decomposition; SVD). Sometimes the transformation is the defining
component of the method, as is the case for LSA, which is
based on SVD. In other cases, however, the transformations
have been applied rather arbitrarily to the counts matrix
based on empirical studies investigating which transformations optimized the performance on a set of tasks. For
example, in its original formulation, the HAL model did
not involve complex weighting schemes or dimensionality
reduction steps, but later it was found that they improved
the performance of the model (e.g., Bullinaria & Levy, 2007,
2012). Transformations are now often applied when training the models (e.g., Mandera, Keuleers, & Brysbaert, 2015;
Recchia & Louwerse, 2015).
If we consider Marr’s (1982) distinction between computational, algorithmic, and implementational levels of
explanation, the count models are only defined at the computational level (Landauer & Dumais, 1997, p. 216): They
consist of functions that map from a text corpus to a count
matrix and from the count matrix to its transformed versions. Regarding the algorithmic level, Landauer and
Dumais (1997) did not attribute any realism to the mechanisms performing the mapping. They only proposed that
the counting step and its associated weighting scheme
could be seen as a rough approximation of conditioning
or associative processes and that the dimensionality reduction step could be considered an approximation of a data
reduction process performed by the brain. In other words,
it cannot be assumed that the brain stores a perfect representation of word-context pairs or runs complex matrix
decomposition algorithms in the same way as digital computers do.1 In the case of HAL, even less was said about the
psychological plausibility of the selected algorithms.
Another problem is that count models require all the information to be present before the transformations are applied,
whereas, in reality, learning in cognitive systems is incremental, not conditional on the simultaneous availability of
all information.

1
It is known that dimension reduction can be performed by biological
(e.g. Olshausen & Field, 1996) and artificial (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006)
neural networks. This fact is rarely mentioned when authors discuss
various approaches to distributional semantics in the psycholinguistic
literature.

In other words, although the count models, like all computational models, were very specific about which properties were extracted from the corpus to build the count
matrix, and which mathematical functions were applied
to the counts matrix in the transformation step, they made
it much less clear how these computations could be performed by the human cognitive system.2 This is surprising,
given that the models originated in the psychological
literature.
Unexpectedly, a recent family of models, which originated in computer science and natural language processing, may be more psychologically plausible than the
count models. Mikolov, Chen, et al. (2013) argued that a
relatively simple model based on a neural network (see
Fig. 1) can be surprisingly efficient at creating semantic
spaces.
This family of models is built on the concept of prediction. Instead of explicitly representing the words and their
context in a matrix, the model is based on a relatively narrow window (similar in size to the one often used in the
HAL model) sliding through the corpus. By changing the
weights of the network, the model learns to predict the
current word given the context words (Continuous Bag of
Words model; CBOW) or the context words given the current word (skip-gram model). Because of the predictive
component in this family of models, again following
Baroni et al. (2014), we will refer to these models as predict models. As indicated above, there are two main types:
the CBOW model and the skip-gram model. Even though
the predict models originated outside the context of psychological research and were not concerned with psychological plausibility, the simple underlying principle –
implicitly learning how to predict one event (a word in a
text corpus) from associated events – is arguably much
better grounded psychologically than constructing a count
matrix and applying arbitrary transformations to it. The
implicit learning principle is congruent with other biologically inspired models of associative learning (Rescorla &
Wagner, 1972), given that they both learn on the basis of
the deviation between the observed event and the predicted event (see Baayen, Milin, Filipovic Durdevic,
Hendrix, & Marelli, 2011). An additional advantage of the
model is that it is trained using a stochastic gradient descent, which in this case means that it can be trained incrementally with only one target–context pairing available for
each update of the weights, and does not require all cooccurrence information to be present simultaneously as
is the case with the count models.
To illustrate in what sense we consider the predict
models to be psychologically plausible, we would like to
compare them to the Rescorla–Wagner model – a classical
learning model (for a review see Miller, Barnet, & Grahame,
1995), which has also been successfully applied to psycholinguistics (Baayen et al., 2011). This model learns to
associate cues with outcomes by being sequentially presented with training cases. For each training case, if there
is a discrepancy between the outcomes predicted based
2
Although Landauer and Dumais (1997) discuss how the LSA algorithm
could hypothetically be implemented in a neural network, this aspect is not
reflected in their implementation of the model.

P. Mandera et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 57–78

59

Fig. 1. Both the CBOW and the skip-gram models are simple neural networks (a) consisting of an input, a hidden and an output layer. In the input and the
output layers each node corresponds to a word. So, the number of nodes in these layers is equal to the total number of entries in the lexicon of the model.
The number of nodes in the hidden layer is a parameter of the model. The training is performed by sliding a window through a corpus and adjusting the
weights to better fit the training examples. When the model encounters a window including a phrase black furry cat, the CBOW model (b) represents the
middle word furry by an activation of the corresponding node in the output layer and all context words (black and cat) are simultaneously activated in the
input layer. Next, the weights are adjusted based on the prediction error. In the case of the skip-gram model (c) the association between each of the context
words (black and cat) is predicted by the target word (furry) in a separate learning step. When training is finished, the weights between the nodes of the
input layer and the hidden nodes are exported as the resulting word vectors.

on current association weights and the observed outcomes
(lack of an expected outcome or presence of an unexpected
outcome), the weights are updated using a simple learning
rule.
Interestingly, the update rule of the Rescorla–Wagner
model is known to be mathematically equivalent to the
delta rule (Sutton & Barto, 1981), which describes stochastic gradient descent in a neural network composed of a single layer of connections and which was independently
proposed outside of the context of psychological research
(Widrow–Hoff, 1960). The same rule has been generalized
to networks consisting of multiple layers of connections
and non-linear activation functions as a backpropagation
algorithm (Rumelhart, Hinton, & Williams, 1986) and is
used to determine changes in connection weights in connectionist models. In other words, the Rescorla–Wagner
model is just a special case of the backpropagation algorithm used with a stochastic gradient descent.
Similarly to the Rescorla–Wagner model, the learning
mechanism which is used to train the predict models is
also based on backpropagation with stochastic gradient

descent. These models learn to minimize errors between
the outcomes predicted on the basis of the cues and the
observed outcomes by updating the weights of the connections between the nodes in the network when observing
events in a text corpus. Here cues and outcomes correspond to target and context words in a sliding window,
and each update of the weights is based on a predicted
and observed pairing between the target word and its context. The learned semantic representation, which can be
thought of as a pattern of activation of the hidden nodes
for a word in an input layer, is learned as a by-product of
learning to associate contexts and target words. The model
is usually trained in one pass over the corpus with the
number of the training cases dependent on the size of
the corpus.
In this sense, the predict models are trained using a
similar technique as the Rescorla–Wagner learning rule,
adapted for a network which includes a hidden layer and
a non-linear activation function. It could be argued that
introducing the hidden layer and non-linearity to the
model make it conceptually more complex than the

60

P. Mandera et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 57–78

Rescorla–Wagner model.3 However, it is clear that it may be
impossible to represent more complex phenomena, such as
semantics, in models as simple as the Rescorla–Wagner
model. In the case of the predict models, the hidden layer
is necessary to introduce a dimensionality reduction step
(Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006; Olshausen & Field, 1996)
and a non-linear (softmax) activation function is necessary
to transform activations of outcomes to probabilities. In fact
it has been argued that using neural networks deeper than
three layers may be necessary and justified to simulate
and explain cognitive phenomena: deep neural networks
have proven to be successful in a large variety of fields (for
a review see LeCun, Bengio, & Hinton, 2015) and hierarchal
processing is also recognized as a fundamental principle of
information processing in the human brain (Hinton, 2007).
The need for recognizing deeper architectures as valid
approaches to cognitive modeling has also been proposed
in the psychological literature (Testolin, Stoianov, Sperduti,
& Zorzi, 2015; Zorzi, Testolin, & Stoianov, 2013).
In addition to their potential theoretical appeal, the predict models were shown to offer a particularly good performance across a set of tasks and generally outperform the
count models (Baroni et al., 2014; Mandera et al., 2015)
or perform as well as the best tuned count model. On the
other hand, it has also been argued that the superior performance of the predict models is largely due to using better tuned parameters as default for training these models
than is the case for the count models (Levy, Goldberg,
Dagan, & Ramat-Gan, 2015). Even if the performance of
the predict models does not surpass that of the count models, they are generally much more compact in terms of how
much computational resources they require, which is also
of practical importance.
Although the predict models are built on a quite simple
principle, it is not as obviously clear as in the case of the
count models what, in mathematical terms, these models
are computing (Goldberg & Levy, 2014). Interestingly, it
has been argued that some of the predict models may
implicitly perform a computation that is mathematically
equivalent to the dimensionality reduction of a certain
type of the count model. In particular, Levy and Goldberg
(2014) argued that the skip-gram model is implicitly factorizing a PMI transformed count matrix shifted by a constant value. If this is the case, and the relationship between
the two classes of models becomes well understood, this
could create an interesting opportunity for psychologists
by showing how mathematically well-defined operations
(PPMI, SVD) can be realized on psychologically plausible
systems (neural networks) to acquire semantic
information.
Given the potential convergence of the predict and
count models it becomes especially important to introduce
3
It is important to note that although a network with no hidden layers
may be simpler conceptually, it does not necessarily mean that it is more
parsimonious in terms of the number of parameters that need to be
specified. For example, consider a network with 50,000 words as cues and
the same number of outcomes. A fully-connected network with a single
layer of connections, such as the Rescorla–Wagner model, would require
50,000  50,000 = 2.5 billion parameters (weights) to be specified, while
introducing a hidden layer including 300 nodes drastically reduces this
number to 2  50,000  300 = 30 million parameters (weights).

the predict models to psycholinguistics. If the count models are well specified at Marr’s (1982) computational level
of explanation, the predict models could provide an algorithmic level explanation, bringing us closer to understanding how semantic representations may emerge from
incrementally updating the predictions about cooccurrences of events in the environment. Nevertheless,
because to our knowledge this is the first time these models are discussed in a psycholinguistic context, in the current paper we did not focus on investigating the
convergence of the two classes of models but chose to train
different semantic spaces with typical parameter settings
and details of the training procedures.
To advance our understanding of the new predict models (both CBOW and skip gram) and their relationship to
the more traditional count models in a psychological context, we performed an evaluation of the three types of
models against a set of psychologically relevant tasks. In
order to gain a more complete picture of how these models
perform we tried to explore their parameter space instead
of limiting ourselves to a single set of parameters. In addition, we wanted to find out how much of what we have
learned about count models can be generalized to the predict models.
Of course, the investigated implementations of the predict models are only loosely related to psychologically
plausible principles (such as prediction). We do not claim
that the investigated predict models represent a human
capacity to learn semantics in a fully realistic way, but
rather we argue that they should be investigated carefully
because they may represent an interesting starting point
for bridging the theoretical gap between the count models,
various transformations applied as part of these models,
and fundamental psychological principles.

Comparing distributional models of semantics
There is a rich literature in which different approaches
to distributional semantics have been evaluated. In general
they form two types of investigations: Either various
parameters and transformations within one approach are
tested to find the most successful set of parameter settings
(e.g. Bullinaria & Levy, 2007, 2012), or different approaches
are compared to each other to establish the best one (e.g.
Baroni et al., 2014; Levy et al., 2015).
The evaluations are often based on a wide range of
tasks. For example, Bullinaria and Levy (2007, 2012) compared the performance of a HAL-type count model on four
tasks: The Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL;
Landauer & Dumais, 1997), distance comparison, semantic
categorization (Patel et al., 1997), and syntactic categorization (Levy, Bullinaria, & Patel, 1998). The authors varied a
number of factors such as the window size, the applied
weighting scheme, whether dimensionality reduction was
performed, whether or not the corpus was lemmatized
(all inflected words replaced by their base forms), and so
on. They found that the best results on their battery test
were achieved by the models that used narrow windows,
the PPMI weighting scheme, and a custom, SVD-based
dimensionality reduction step. The lemmatization or use

P. Mandera et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 57–78

of stop-words did not improve the performance of the
model.
Comparisons of different classes of models include a
recent comparison of the predict approach to the traditional count model on a range of computational linguistic
benchmark tasks: Baroni et al. (2014) compared the models using semantic relatedness (Agirre et al., 2009; Bruni,
Tran, & Baroni, 2014; Rubenstein & Goodenough, 1965),
synonym detection (TOEFL; similar to Landauer &
Dumais, 1997), concept categorization (purity of clustering
categorization, Almuhareb, 2006; Baroni, Barbu, Murphy, &
Poesio, 2010; Baroni, Evert, & Lenci, 2008), selection preferences (Baroni & Lenci, 2010; McRae, Spivey-Knowlton,
& Tanenhaus, 1998; Padó & Lapata, 2007), and analogy
(Mikolov, Chen, et al., 2013) and found that the predict
models had a superior performance on computational linguistic benchmark tasks and were more robust to varying
parameter settings. Levy et al. (2015) show that although
count models lack the robustness of predict models, they
can work equally well with specific weighting schemes
and dimensionality reduction procedures.
It is clear that the benchmark tasks from computational
linguistics may not be the most relevant ones for issues
related to human semantic processing and representation.
For instance, a lot of attention has been devoted to how
well various distributional semantic models perform on
the TOEFL, which consists of choosing which of four
response alternatives most closely matches a target word
over 80 trials with increasing difficulty. Unless we want
to model scholastic over-achievement, there is no a priori
reason to believe that the model scoring best on this test
is also the psychologically most plausible one. A simple
psycholinguistic benchmark could consist of correctly predicting the proportion of alternatives chosen by participants. In this respect, the relatedness ratings or elicited
associations tasks used in the computational linguistics
benchmarks can also be considered valid benchmarks for
psycholinguistics. However, evaluating computational
models in psycholinguistics also involves comparing predictions about the time course associated with processing
stimuli. The most frequently used task to study the time
course of semantic processing in humans is semantic priming. This task consists of the presentation of a prime word
followed by a target stimulus. Usually, the task involves
either reading the target word out loud (naming) or deciding whether the stimulus is an existing word or a pseudoword (lexical decision). The task does not involve an
explicit response about the semantic relationship between
prime and target. However, it is assumed that the time it
takes to name the word out or to make a decision on its
lexicality is decreased by the degree of semantic relatedness between the prime and the target. Therefore, in contrast to other benchmarks in which participants are
asked to give explicit responses about semantic content,
semantic priming is assumed to inform us about the implicit workings of semantic memory.
Predicting semantic priming with distributional models
The question of whether semantic similarity measures
derived from distributional semantics models can predict

61

semantic priming in human participants has been investigated in a number of psycholinguistic studies. In terms of
the methodology employed these investigations can be
divided in two classes. Some studies simply look at the
stimuli across related and unrelated priming conditions
and investigate whether there is a significant difference
in semantic space derived similarity scores between these
conditions. Other studies try to model the semantic priming at the item level by means of regression analysis.
The first class of studies is exemplified by Lund,
Burgess, and Atchley (1995) who found that the HALderived similarity measures significantly differed for
semantically related and unrelated conditions. A similar
approach was taken by McDonald and Brew (2004) and
Padó and Lapata (2007), who used distributional semantics
models to model semantic priming data from Hodgson
(1991). Jones, Kintsch, and Mewhort (2006) compared
the BEAGLE, HAL and LSA models on a wide range of priming tasks, and investigated differences in how well these
methods mimicked the results of multiple priming studies.
The regression-based approach was already employed
in Lund and Burgess (1996), who reported that relatedness
measures derived from HAL significantly correlated with
semantic priming data from an existing priming study
(Chiarello, Burgess, Richards, & Pollock, 1990). A detailed
examination of the factors modulating the size of the
semantic priming effect based on 300 pairs of words was
conducted by Hutchison, Balota, Cortese, and Watson
(2008). In a regression design the authors found no effect
of the LSA score. However, it is worth noting that a large
number of other predictors were entered in the analysis,
including other semantic variables, such as forward and
backward association strength from an association study
by Nelson, McEvoy, and Schreiber (1998). Collinearity of
these measures may have contributed to the fact that no
significant effect of the LSA score was found. In addition,
the null result does not prove that computational indices
are unable to predict semantic priming, as the quality of
the used semantic space may have been suboptimal.
Another item-level study was conducted recently by
Günther, Dudschig, and Kaup (2016) in German. In that
study the authors carefully selected a set of items spanning
the full range of LSA similarity scores computed on the
basis of a relatively small corpus of blogs (about 5 million
words). The authors found a small but significant effect
of the LSA similarity scores on semantic priming. The critical difference between this study and the one conducted
by Hutchison et al. (2008) was in how the authors analyzed
the data: Hutchison et al. (2008) first subtracted RTs in the
related condition from the RTs in the unrelated condition
and then fitted regressions to the resulting difference.
Günther et al. (2016) simply predicted the reaction times
to the target words while including a set of other variables
(including semantic similarity with the prime) as predictors. Difference scores between correlated variables are
known to have a low reliability (Cronbach & Furby, 1970)
and arguably reduced reliability may have contributed to
lack of significant effect in the study by Hutchison et al.
(2008).
Although the item-level, regression based approach has
multiple advantages over factorial designs (Balota, Cortese,

62

P. Mandera et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 57–78

Sergent-Marshall, Spieler, & Yap, 2004; Balota, Yap,
Hutchison, & Cortese, 2012), until recently it was difficult
to conduct this type of analysis on a sufficiently large number of items. Fortunately, due to the recent rise of megastudies (Keuleers & Balota, 2015), the situation is
improving rapidly. Thanks to the semantic priming project
(SPP) ran by Hutchison et al. (2013), we now have a much
better opportunity to look at how much of the total variability in primed lexical decision times (LDT) and word
naming times can be explained by semantic variables
based on distributional semantics models. The advantage
of this approach is that with enough data we can directly
model RTs as a function of semantic similarity between
the prime and the target, also including other critical predictors known to influence performance on psycholinguistic tasks. Because in a megastudy approach it is natural to
focus on effect sizes more than on categorical decisions
based on statistical significance, the method lends itself
to comparing various semantic spaces by examining how
much variance in RTs they account for.
Corpus effects in distributional semantics
The performance of distributional semantics models in
accounting for human data can be affected by the degree
to which the training corpus of the model corresponds to
the input human participants have been exposed to. Ideally, the model would be trained on exactly the same quality and size of data as participants of psycholinguistic
experiments (typically first-year university students). Of
course, this ideal can only be approximated. In particular,
much of the language humans have been exposed to is spoken and can only be used for modeling purposes after a
time-consuming transcription process. Instead, models
are typically based on written language which is available
in large quantities but is often less representative of typical
language input.
It has been observed that frequency measures based on
corpora of subtitles from popular films and television series outperform frequency measures based on much larger
corpora of various written sources. For instance,
Brysbaert, Keuleers, and New (2011) showed that word
frequency measures based on a corpus of 50 million words
from subtitles predicted the lexical decision times of the
English Lexicon Project (Balota et al., 2007) better than
the Google frequencies based on a corpus of hundreds of
billions words from books. A similar finding was reported
by Brysbaert et al. (2011) for German. In particular, word
frequencies derived from non-fiction, academic texts perform worse (Brysbaert, New, & Keuleers, 2012). On the
other hand, Mandera, Keuleers, Wodniecka, and Brysbaert
(2015) showed that a well-balanced corpus of written texts
from various sources performed as well as subtitle-based
frequencies in a Polish lexical decision task.
An interesting question in this respect is how important
the corpus size is for distributional semantics vectors.
Whereas a corpus of 50 million words may be enough for
frequency measures of individual words, larger corpora
are likely to be needed for semantic distance measures,
as estimation of semantic vectors composed of hundreds
of values may be a more demanding task than assigning

a frequency to a word. Some evidence along these lines
was reported by Recchia and Jones (2009), who observed
that using a large corpus is more important than employing a more sophisticated learning algorithm. The two corpora they compared contained 6 million words versus
417 million words. On the other hand, De Deyne,
Verheyen, and Storms (2015), based on a comparison
between corpus samples of various sizes, conclude that
corpus size is not critical for modeling mental
representations.
In addition to the effect of corpus size, the language register tapped into by the corpus could also influence semantic distance measures based on distributional models. We
will discuss this issue by comparing the performance of
models based on subtitle corpora with the performance
of models based on written materials. If subtitle corpora
perform better than the larger text corpora of written
materials, this indicates that register is an important variable. In addition, if the concatenation of both corpora turns
out to be inferior on some tasks, this is again an indication
of the importance of the register captured by subtitle
corpora.

Evaluating semantic spaces as psycholinguistic resources
The availability of the priming lexical decision and word
naming megastudy data collected by Hutchison et al.
(2013) makes a systematic comparison of various measures of semantic relatedness feasible and opportune. In
addition to various distributional semantic models, semantic relatedness ratings can also originate from featurebased data (McRae, Cree, Seidenberg, & McNorgan, 2005),
human association norms (Nelson et al., 1998), or semantic
relatedness ratings (Juhasz, Lai, & Woodcock, 2015).
Although we will include these alternatives in our comparison, it should be noted that they have some important
practical limitations: (1) they are defined only for a subset
of words and (2) they do not exist in most languages that
can be potentially of interest to psycholinguists.
To perform the evaluation, the logic of evaluating word
frequency norms (Brysbaert & New, 2009; Keuleers,
Brysbaert, & New, 2010) will be followed. In these evaluations, various word frequency norms are used to predict
lexical decision and word naming RTs in order to identify
the set of norms that accounts for the largest percentage
of variance in the behavioral data (ideally together with
other lexical variables that affect word processing times,
such as word length and neighborhood density). An almost
identical procedure can be applied to semantic spaces. A
linear regression model can be fitted to the lexical decision
and naming latencies of target words preceded by semantically related or unrelated primes. The variables known to
influence word recognition (frequency, length, and similarity to other words) will be used as baseline predictors, to
which the semantic distance between the prime and the
target derived from the various distributional semantics
models will be added. This leads to the measurement of
how much extra variance in behavioral data can be
accounted for by adding relatedness measures from each
distributional semantic model.

P. Mandera et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 57–78

Although this approach can be informative of a model’s
absolute performance, it does not give an indication of the
relative evidence in favor of each model. The approach based
on comparing amount of variance explained is also biased
toward more complex models when comparing them
against the baseline (including more variables gives more
explanatory power but may result in overfitting the training
data). In order to overcome these limitations, we applied a
regression technique based on Bayes factors (e.g.
Wagenmakers, 2007) as described by Rouder and Morey
(2012; see also Liang, Paulo, Molina, Clyde, & Berger,
2008). The Bayes factor is a measure of relative probability
of the data under a pair of alternative models. This method
also automatically incorporates a penalty for model complexity (Wagenmakers, 2007) and is flexible with respect
to which models can be compared. For instance, it allows
the comparison of non-nested models, which is difficult in
a frequentist approach (Kass & Raftery, 1995). This property
makes it possible to quantify the relative evidence in favor of
models with predictors from various semantic spaces.
Although we consider the data from the semantic priming project as the most informative with respect to getting
insight into the semantic system of typical participants in
psychology experiments, we will also look at how well
the various measures perform on a number of other tasks,
and we will include some data from the Dutch language, to
test for cross-language generalization. In addition, where
possible we will compare the outcome of the new variables
to those currently used by psycholinguists.
Initially, we intended to compare two count models
(LSA-inspired and HAL-inspired) with two predict models
(CBOW and skip-gram). However, when we tried to calculate the LSA-type model on our corpora, it became clear that
the number of documents (particularly in the UKWAC corpus) was too large to represent the term by document
matrix in computer memory and perform SVD on that
matrix. As a result, we had to use a non-standard, more scalable implementation of the SVD algorithm implemented in
the Gensim toolkit (Rehuřek & Sojka, 2010), which returned
vectors that were not doing particularly well. Because it is
not clear whether the bad performance of the LSA-type measure is due to the inferior performance of the LSA approach
itself or to the algorithm, and because LSA-based measures
in the past have done worse than HAL-based measures, we
decided not to include the former in the analyses reported
below. For the most important task (semantic priming),
however, we do provide the LSA measures as provided by
the Colorado website for comparison purposes.
Finally, to obtain a more nuanced view of how the models perform across different parameter settings we
explored their parameter space. By doing so, we make sure
that we give each model maximal opportunity and we can
examine whether all models are similarly affected by, for
instance, the size of the window around the target word
or the number of dimensions included in the model.

63

Levy (2007, 2012) no lemmatization or exclusion of function words was used. To represent the degree to which
two words are related according to the used semantic
spaces we computed cosine distances between word vectors u and v according to the formula:



uv
Dcos ðu; v Þ ¼ 1 
kukkv k

In this formula u  v stands for a dot product between
vectors u and v, and ||u|| and ||v|| for the length of the vector u and v respectively.
English
Text corpora
The corpora we used for creating the English semantic
spaces were UKWAC (a corpus of about 2 billion words
resulting from a web crawling program; Ferraresi,
Zanchetta, Baroni, & Bernardini, 2008) and a corpus of
about 385 million words compiled from film and television
subtitles. More information about UKWAC can be found in
Ferraresi et al. (2008).
The subtitle corpus was created based on 204,408 documents downloaded from the Open Subtitles website
(http://opensubtitles.org) whose language was tagged as
English by the contributors of that website. We first
removed all subtitle related formatting. Next, to eliminate
all documents that contained a large proportion of text in a
language other than English, we calculated preliminary
word frequencies based on all documents, and removed
all documents in cases where the 30 most frequent words
did not cover at least 30% of the total number of tokens in
that subtitle file. Because many subtitles are available in
multiple versions we implemented duometer,4 a tool for
detecting near-duplicate text documents using the MinHash
algorithm (Broder, 1997). The final version of the corpus
contained 69,382 documents and 385 million tokens.
We also combined the two corpora for the purpose of
computing the semantic spaces. The combined corpus contained 2.33 billion tokens and 2.76 million documents.
Model training
We trained the (HAL-type) count model by sliding a
symmetrical window through the corpus and counting
how many times each pair of words co-occurred. We considered the 300,000 most frequent terms in the corpus as
both target and context elements (Baroni et al., 2014).
Next, we transformed the resulting word by word cooccurrence matrix using the positive pointwise mutual
information (PPMI) scheme (Bullinaria & Levy, 2007). The
transformation involved computing pointwise mutual
information (Church & Hanks, 1990) for each pair of words
x and y according to the formula:

PMIðx; yÞ ¼ log 2

pðx; yÞ
pðxÞpðyÞ

Evaluation
For each corpus the tokenization was done by extracting all the alphabetical strings. Following Bullinaria and

4
We released duometer as an open-source project. The tool and its
source code are available at: http://crr.ugent.be/programs-data/duometer.

64

P. Mandera et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 57–78

where p(x) is the probability of the word x in the text corpus, p(y) is the probability of the word y in the text corpus
and p(x, y) is the probability of the co-occurrence of the
words x and y. In the final step, the values of the cells in
the matrix for which the pointwise mutual information
values were negative were substituted with 0, so that the
matrix contained only non-negative values (hence positive
pointwise mutual information).
We trained the CBOW and skip-gram models using
Gensim (Rehuřek & Sojka, 2010),5 an implementation that
is compatible with word2vec (Mikolov, Chen, et al., 2013)
– the original implementation of the predict models. For
these models, all word forms occurring minimally 5 times
in the corpus were included. Each model was trained using
50, 100, 200, 300 and 500 dimensions. We set the parameter
k for negative sampling to 10 and the sub-sampling parameter to 1e5. Sub-sampling is a method for mitigating the
influence of the most frequent words (Mikolov, Chen,
et al., 2013) by randomly removing words with a probability
higher than a pre-specified threshold. Negative sampling is a
computational optimization that avoids computing probabilities for all words in an output layer. In each learning case
only a subset of words is considered.
An important parameter influencing the performance of
count models (Bullinaria & Levy, 2007, 2012) is the size of
the sliding window. We varied this parameter for the count
and predict models in the range from 1 to 10 words before
and after the target word6 (i.e., the minimal window size of
1 included 3 words: the target word, one word before, and
one word after).
Evaluation tasks
In order to keep vocabulary size constant across the
count and predict models and across the three corpora
used (subtitles, written texts, and their combination), we
used only the subset of words that all semantic spaces
had in common. We also wanted to compare our semantic
spaces with the best performing space from Baroni et al.
(2014; CBOW model with 400 dimensions, window size
5, negative sampling value 10, trained on the concatenation of the UKWAC, Wikipedia and the British National corpus including 2.8 billion words).7 Therefore, we further
limited the vocabulary of the models to the intersection with
the vocabulary of that dataset. The resulting semantic spaces
contained 113,000 distinct words.
Semantic priming – method
We used the data from the Semantic Priming Project
(Hutchison et al., 2013), which contains lexical decision
times and naming times to 1661 target words preceded
by four types of primes. Two prime types were semantically related to the target but differed in their association
strength; the other two types were unrelated primes
5

The toolkit is available at https://radimrehurek.com/gensim/.
The CBOW and skip-gram models limit the size of the window used on
individual learning trials to a randomly chosen value in the range from 1 to
the requested window size.
7
Downloaded from: http://clic.cimec.unitn.it/composes/semantic-vectors.html.
6

matched to the related primes in terms of word length
and word frequency. The Semantic Priming Project contains two more variables of interest for our purpose. They
are the semantic similarity measures derived from LSA
(trained on the TASA corpus, 300 dimensions; Landauer &
Dumais, 1997) and from BEAGLE (Jones et al., 2006). These
numbers allow us to compare the newly calculated measures to the current state of the art in psycholinguistics.
As the data were not available for all prime–target pairs,
this further reduced the dataset. In the end 5734 of the
original 6644 prime–target pairs remained.
For lexical decision (LDT) all non-word trials were
excluded from the dataset and for both LDT and word naming we excluded all erroneous responses. We excluded all
trials with RTs deviating more than 3 standard deviations
from the mean and computed z-scores separately for each
participant and each session. Finally, we averaged the zscores for each prime–target pair and used the result as
the dependent variable in our analyses.
Next, we fitted linear regression models with various
predictors to evaluate the amount of variance in the standardized RTs that could be accounted for. First, we calculated a baseline model including log word frequency
(SUBTLEX-US; Brysbaert & New, 2009), word length (number of letters), and orthographic neighborhood density
(Coltheart, Davelaar, Jonasson, & Besner, 1977) of both
the prime and the target (all variables as reported in the
Semantic Priming Project dataset). Then, we fitted another
linear regression model including the baseline predictors
plus the measure of semantic distance between the prime
and the target provided by the semantic space we were
investigating, and looked at how much extra variance the
semantic similarity estimate explained. We used all pairs
of stimuli across all conditions (both related and unrelated
words).
Semantic priming – results
The baseline regression model including the logarithm
of word frequency, length, and neighborhood density (all
predictors included for both the prime and the target
word) explained 38.9% of the variance in the lexical decision RTs and 31.2% of the variance in the word naming
latencies (see Fig. 2).
When the relatedness scores from the distributional
semantics models were added as a predictor, the amount
of variance explained increased for both tasks. The
improvement was already highly significant for the relatedness measure based on the worst performing model.
For LDT, this was the skip-gram model trained on the concatenation of the subtitle and the UKWAC corpus with
dimensionality 500 and window size 1 [improvement relative to the baseline model: F(1, 5729) = 367.27, p < .001];
for word naming it was the skip-gram model trained on
the UKWAC corpus with dimensionality 500 and window
size 1 [F(1, 5729) = 99.778, p < .001].
As can be seen in Fig. 2, the fit of the three semantic vectors depended on the task (LDT vs naming), on the window
size, and on the corpus taken into account. For each type of
a model, Table 1 shows its average performance across all
tested parameters and the performance and parameters of
the best model.

P. Mandera et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 57–78

65

Fig. 2. Performance of the three types of models on the Semantic Priming Project (Hutchison et al., 2013) dataset. The straight blue lines indicate the
performance of the baseline model which did not include semantic predictors. Although the best count model in the LDT tasks performs slightly better than
the best predict model (CBOW), its performance decreases rapidly with increasing window size. For naming, the predict models generally provide a better
fit to the behavioral data. The models trained on the subtitle corpora or on the concatenation of the subtitle corpus and the UKWAC corpus perform
particularly well on these tasks. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Several interesting findings emerged from our analyses.
First, in many cases the models trained on the subtitle corpus outperformed the models based on the UKWAC written corpus or the combination of the two corpora. This
effect was particularly clear for the count (both in LDT
and word naming) and the CBOW models (in LDT). The difference was less clear for the skip-gram models. In all
cases, the addition of the 385 million words from the subtitle corpus to the 2.33 billion word corpus of written texts
considerably improved performance.
A second remarkable observation is that the best models are quite comparable but have different window sizes.
In particular, for the count model there is a steep decrease
in performance with increasing window size above 3
which was not observed for the predict models. As a result,
the optimal window size is larger for the predict models
than for the count model.

Semantic priming – a comparison with the existing measures
of semantic similarity
To further gauge the usefulness of the new semantic
similarity measures, we compared the extra variance they
explain to that explained by the currently used measures.
The Semantic Priming Project database includes measures
for LSA and BEAGLE. Currently, if a distributional semantics
model is used for the purpose of selecting experimental
stimuli, psychologists tend to rely on the LSA space available through a web interface at the University of Colorado
Boulder (http://lsa.colorado.edu/; Landauer & Dumais,
1997). This is understandable, as the semantic space was
created to accompany a classic paper and because the
resource has a practical interface which makes data extraction easy. Yet, given the recent developments in distributional semantics and the availability of much larger
corpora than the one on which the LSA spaces were trained

66

P. Mandera et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 57–78

Table 1
Results of the analysis of the English semantic priming data. The table shows the average percentage of variance explained in lexical decision reaction times
and naming latencies for different classes of models across all training procedures (the second column), the associated standard deviations (the third column)
and performance (the fourth column), and the details of the training procedure (the fifth column) for the best model of each type.
All models
2

Best model

Average R (%)

2

R SD (%)

R2 (%)

Model training

LDT
Count
CBOW
Skip-gram

44.5
44.5
43.9

0.6
0.5
0.5

45.7
45.5
44.6

Subtitle, window 3
Subtitle, window 6, dim. 300
UKWAC + subtitle, window 10, dim. 200

Naming
Count
CBOW
Skip-gram

32.8
33.0
32.7

0.3
0.1
0.2

33.2
33.2
33.2

Subtitle, window 3
UKWAC + subtitle, window 8, dim. 300
UKWAC + subtitle, window 10, dim. 200

(most prominently the TASA corpus of about 11 million
words), there is a need to reevaluate whether the LSAbased semantic spaces should remain the default choice
for measuring semantic relatedness in psychological
research.
The TASA-based LSA similarity scores explained 43.9%
of the variance in lexical decision reaction times and
32.7% of the variance in naming. The BEAGLE scores
explained 43.0% of the variance in lexical decision reaction
times and 32.3% of the variance in word naming latencies.8
All values are below those of the best performing CBOW
model (45.5% in LDT and 33.2% in naming).
Our best models also compare well relative to the
spaces trained by Baroni et al. (2014). The best performing
semantic space of Baroni et al. (2014) explained 44.0% of
the variance in lexical decision reaction times and 33.0%
of the variance in word naming latencies.
To examine how much more variance could be
explained by human word association norms (Nelson
et al., 1998) and feature norms (McRae et al., 2005), we
performed an analysis on the subsets of words that are
included in these datasets. We compared the semantic
similarity indices based on the human data to those of
the best count, CBOW and skip-gram spaces for the lexical
decision task. There were 2904 cue–target pairs that were
simultaneously present in the priming data, the association norms and the vocabulary of our semantic spaces.
For this subset of Semantic Priming Project data, the
baseline regression model (including logarithm of word
frequency, length and neighborhood density of both the
cue and the target) explained 38.9% of the variance in
LDT and 31.2% in word naming. The model that additionally included human forward association strength
explained 41.7% of the variance in lexical decision RTs
and 32.7% of the total variance in word naming. The best
performing count model (trained on the subtitle corpus,
using window size 3) explained 42.3% of the variance in
lexical decision RTs and 31.9% of the variance in word
naming latencies. The best CBOW model (trained on the
subtitle corpus; 300 dimensions; window size 6)
accounted for 41.9% of the variance in LDT RTs and 32.0%
in word naming latencies. The best skip-gram model
(trained on the concatenation of the UKWAC and subtitle

8
BEAGLE scores based on cosine distances; the other measures performed worse.

corpus; 200 dimensions; window 10) explained 41.0% of
the variance in lexical decision and 32.1% of the variance
in naming. As can be seen, all models performed very similarly and close to what can be achieved by human data.
We would like to note, however, that it is harder to explain
additional variance in RTs based on relatedness data,
because the subset of the Semantic Priming Project that
was used for this analysis contained only pairs of words
generated as associates in the Nelson et al. (1998) database, which significantly reduced the range of relatedness
values.
The intersection between the feature norms from
McRae et al. (2005), the semantic priming data, and the
vocabulary data of our datasets included 100 word pairs.
The baseline model explained 37.0% of the variance in
LDT RTs and 29.3% of the variance in word naming latencies. Adding the relatedness scores computed as the cosine
between the features vectors increased the percentage of
variance accounted for by the model to 42.7% for LDT RTs
and to 29.8% for word naming latencies. The amount of
variance explained by the model in which we inserted
the measures derived from the best performing count
model was 54.6% for LDT RTs and 35.3% for word naming.
In the case of the best CBOW model, the total explained
variance amounted to 52.8% for lexical decision and
32.3% for naming. When the best performing skip-gram
model word distance estimates were included in the
model, it explained 52.3% of the variance in LDT RTs and
31.9% of the variance in word naming latencies. So, for this
dataset, the semantic spaces actually outperformed the
human data.
Semantic priming – Bayes factors analysis
To further gauge the importance of the semantic vectors, we calculated Bayes factors. These inform us how
much more likely one model is relative to another. For all
Bayesian analyses reported in this paper we adopted an
approach described by Rouder and Morey (2012; see also
Liang et al., 2008). We used default9 mixture-of-variance
priors on effect size. For both LDT and naming we first identified baseline models that included an optimal combination
9
The default ‘medium’ setting for the rscaleCont argument in the
regressionBF function in the R BayesFactor package, corresponding to the r
scale = sqrt(2)/4. We also conducted a series of analyses with altered priors
but this did not change the qualitative pattern of results, so we report only
analyses conducted with default settings.

P. Mandera et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 57–78

of lexical, non-semantic covariates. For both the prime and
the target, we considered the following co-variates: log of
word frequency, length, and orthographic neighborhood
density.
A Bayes factor of 10 is assumed to be strong evidence
for the superiority of a model and a Bayes factor above
100 is considered as decisive evidence. As can be seen in
Table 2, all Bayes factors we calculated were far above
these values. Moreover, we found evidence that combining
some of the semantic vectors outperformed a model based
on each of them separately, although it is not clear how
useful such a combination would be for stimulus selection.
Bayes factor analysis also confirmed that models based on
count and CBOW were decisively better than those based
on word association norms and feature norms.
When we compared the three types of models, we
observed that in the analysis of LDT, the best performing
count model (trained on the subtitle corpus with window
size 3) did better than the best CBOW model (including
300 dimensions, trained on the subtitle corpora with window size 6; BF10 = 521) and the best skip gram model
(trained on the concatenation of the UKWAC and subtitle
corpora, 200 dimensions, window size 10, BF10 = 5.7
7  1024). For naming, the best count model also outperformed the best CBOW model (BF01 = 17.1) and even the best
skip-gram model did better than CBOW (BF01 = 21.2),
although these differences were much smaller.
In summary, the Bayesian analysis showed overwhelming evidence in favor of including semantic relatedness
measures derived from semantic spaces in both naming
and LDT. Even the worst models did considerably better
than the baseline model. There is some evidence that the
best count model outperformed the best CBOW model,
but this superiority is limited to a single window size.
Finally, there is also some evidence that combining various
relatedness measures may be advantageous. This suggests
that different models may capture unique information that
independently explains human performance in semantic
priming. Finally, it is clear that the distributional semantics
models outperform the available human associations and
feature norms in explaining human performance in semantic priming.
Word association norms – method
In order to evaluate how well the different models can
predict human association data we used the dataset collected by Nelson et al. (1998). This contains word associations for 5019 stimulus words collected from over 6000
participants. We limited the analysis to those associations
that were present in all our semantic spaces, which
resulted in a dataset of 70,461 different cue–response pairs
(on average 14 associates per word).
To compare the word associations generated by
humans to those generated by semantic spaces, we computed a metric based on the relative entropy between the
probability distribution of the top 30 associates generated
by the model and the associates generated by the human
participants. This metric captures not only the probabilities for the words generated by humans but also evaluates
whether the same words are generated by the semantic
spaces.

67

To calculate the metric, the following steps were
followed:
1. For each semantic space, we calculated the cosine distances between the cue word and all the other words,
and selected the 30 words that were nearest to the
cue word. A value of 30 corresponds to about twice
the number of associates that are typically generated
in human data. As such, it includes enough responses
to be considered and does not deviate too much from
the number of associates generated by humans.
2. Next, the similarity score for each associate was normalized by dividing it by the sum of all the similarity
values for the cue. The same procedure was applied to
the human association data, with associate counts
being converted to probabilities. If the semantic space
did not include the associate that was present in the
human data or vice versa, a value of 0 was assigned.
3. Next, an additive smoothing was applied to each distribution using a smoothing term of 1/n, in which n is the
number of elements in the distribution.
4. The relative entropy between probability distribution P
and another probability distribution Q was computed
with the formula:

DKL ðPkQ Þ ¼

X
PðiÞ
PðiÞlog 2
Q
ðiÞ
i

5. Finally, the relative entropies were averaged across all
cue words and the average relative entropy was used
as the final score of a given semantic space. Note that
a relative entropy measure is a measure of distance
between probability distributions and, hence, the smaller the measure, the better the fit.

Word association norms – results
To compute a baseline for the performance of the models on the association norms, we used a set of semantic
spaces with word vectors containing nothing but random
values. The average relative entropy between the associations norms and 10 such randomly generated semantic
spaces was 0.84 (SD = 0.0001).
As can be seen in the upper panel of Fig. 3, the models
including semantic information did better than the baseline model (the line at the top of the graphs; remember
than lower values are better here). The predict models
did better than the HAL-type count model, with CBOW
outperforming skip-gram. In addition, we again see the
importance of including the subtitle corpus and of the window size. For the count model, the best performing model
was trained on the subtitle corpus using window size 2
(relative entropy = 0.70). For the CBOW model, the best
performance was achieved by a model with 500 dimensions trained on the concatenation of the subtitle and the
UKWAC corpora with window size 7, which had a relative
entropy of 0.63. The best skip-gram model was trained on
the same corpus, used the same window size, but had 300
dimensions and had relative entropy of 0.66. The average
relative entropy for the measures derived from the count
models was 0.73 (SD = 0.02). For the CBOW models it was

68

P. Mandera et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 57–78

Table 2
Results of the Bayes factor analysis of the English semantic priming data. Bayes factors for the baseline models are reported with reference to the intercept-only
model and, for the remaining models, with reference to the baseline model. In the baseline models only lexical variables but no semantic distance measures
were considered. The worst and best relatedness measures included in the Bayesian analyses were selected separately for each task based on the R2 in the
previous analyses.
Model type

Variables in the selected model

Bayes factor

LDT
Baseline (lexical only)
Lexical + worst relatedness
Lexical + best relatedness
Lexical + multiple relatedness

WFtarget + lentarget + ONtarget
WFtarget + WFprime + lentarget + ONtarget + relworst
WFtarget + WFprime + lentarget + ONtarget + relbest
WFtarget + WFprime + lentarget + ONtarget + relBEAGLE + relCBOW + relcount

BF10 = 2.15  10605
BF1baseline = 1.24  1074
BF1baseline = 2.10  10144
BF1baseline = 4.79  10161

Naming
Baseline (lexical only)
Lexical + worst relatedness
Lexical + best relatedness
Lexical + multiple relatedness

WFtarget + WFprime + lentarget + lenprime
WFtarget + WFprime + lentarget + lenprime + relworst
WFtarget + WFprime + lentarget + lenprime + relbest
WFtarget + lentarget + lenprime + relCBOW + relcount

BF10 = 5.99  10457
BF1baseline = 1.72  1020
BF1baseline = 2.34  1036
BF1baseline = 5.50  1041

Note: WFtarget = log10 of the target word frequency; WFprime = log10 of the prime word frequency; lentarget = number of letters in the target word;
lenprime = number of letters in the prime word; ONtarget = orthographic neighborhood density of the target word; relworst = the worst relatedness measure;
relbest = the best relatedness measure; relCBOW = the best CBOW relatedness measure; relcount = the best count measure; relBEAGLE = the relatedness measure
based on BEAGLE. For the sake of computational efficiency, in the analyses including multiple relatedness measures we removed orthographic neighborhood density of the prime from the set of considered predictors.

Fig. 3. Performance of the three types of models on the association norms dataset (upper panels) and on TOEFL (lower panels). The predict models generally
outperform the count models. Models trained on a subtitle corpus perform worse than the models trained on the UKWAC corpus or a concatenation of the
two corpora. Note that for the association norms lower entropy is better.

69

P. Mandera et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 57–78

Table 3
Results of the analysis of the English similarity and relatedness ratings. The table shows the average correlation between similarity and relatedness ratings and
semantic relatedness measures derived from different classes of models across all training procedures (the second column), the associated standard deviations
(the third column) and performance (the fourth column), and the details of the training procedure (the fifth column) for the best model of each type.
All models
Average r

Best model
r SD

r

Model training

Wordsim-353 relatedness (n = 238)
Count
.35
CBOW
.66
Skip-gram
.59

.09
.04
.04

.55
.72
.67

UKWAC, window 1
UKWAC, window 9, dim. 200
Subtitle, window 7, dim. 200

Wordsim-353 similarity (n = 196)
Count
.43
CBOW
.76
Skip-gram
.7

.15
.02
.04

.72
.8
.78

Subtitle, window 1
Subtitle, window 6, dim. 200
UKWAC + subtitle, window 1, dim. 100

Simlex-999 (n = 998)
Count
CBOW
Skip-gram

0.11
0.06
0.08

.31
.45
.42

UKWAC, window 1
UKWAC, window 2, dim. 500
UKWAC, window 1, dim. 500

.1
.35
.27

0.69 (SD = 0.03) and for the skip-gram model 0.71
(SD = 0.03).
For comparison, the semantic space from Baroni et al.
(2014) had a relative entropy of 0.68, which was better
than the average of the models evaluated here but worse
than the best of those models.
Similarity/relatedness ratings – method
We used two datasets of human judgments of semantic
similarity and relatedness to evaluate the correspondence
between measures derived from semantic spaces and
human semantic distance estimates.
Wordsim-353 (Agirre et al., 2009) is a dataset including
353 word pairs, with about 13–16 human judgments for
each pair. For this dataset the annotation guidelines given
to the judges did not distinguish between similarity and
relatedness. However, the dataset was subsequently split
into a subset of related words and a subset of similar words
on the basis of two further raters’ judgment about the nature of the relationship for each word pair.
The second set of human judgments is Simlex-999 (Hill,
Reichart, & Korhonen, 2014), which contains similarity
scores for 999 word pairs. What makes it different from
Wordsim-353 is its clear distinction between similarity
and relatedness. In the case of Simlex-999 participants
were given very clear instruction to pay attention to the
similarities between the words and not to their relatedness, so that word pairs such as car and bike received high
similarity scores, whereas car and petrol, despite being
strongly related, received low similarity scores.
To evaluate how well each semantic space reflects
human judgments we computed Spearman correlations
between the predictions of the models and the human ratings. When calculating the correlations we included only
those pairs of words that were present in the combined
lexicon of the semantic spaces.
Similarity/relatedness ratings – results
As shown in Table 3, the correlations between semantic
measures derived from the semantic spaces were higher
for the sets of words from Wordsim-353 than for those
from Simlex-999.

As can be seen Fig. 4, although the HAL-type count
model did significantly worse than the CBOW and skipgram models across the entire parameter set, this was particularly true for large window sizes. The best count model
had a window size of one. The fit of the skip-gram model
also tended to decrease with increasing window size,
although there were differences between the three datasets tested. Performance of the CBOW model tended to
be optimal for mid-range window sizes.
Importantly, there was little effect of window size for
the CBOW models (except for the smallest sizes, which
resulted in less good performance).
Interestingly, for this task, models trained on individual
corpora tended to perform better than models trained on
the combination of corpora.
TOEFL – method
TOEFL is a dataset of 80 multiple choice questions created by linguists to measure English vocabulary knowledge
in non-native speakers. The task of the person taking the
test is to decide which of four candidate words is most
similar to the target word. Landauer and Dumais (1997)
first used this task to evaluate a distributional semantics
model.
In our evaluation, we consider that a model provides a
correct answer to a TOEFL question when the correct candidate word has the smallest cosine distance to the target
word in the semantic space compared to the other three
candidate words. One point is awarded for that question
in this case; zero points are given otherwise. When the target word or none of the four alternatives were present in
the semantic space, we assigned a score of 0.25 to the item
to simulate guessing.
TOEFL – results
The results are shown in the lower panel of Fig. 3. The
best count model (UKWAC corpus; window size 1)
obtained a score of 83.7% on the TOEFL test. Average performance of the count models on this test was 61.2%
(SD = 9.76%).
The predict model with the highest score on TOEFL
was a CBOW model with 500 dimensions and window
size 1, trained on the concatenation of the UKWAC and

70

P. Mandera et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 57–78

Fig. 4. Performance of the three types of models on the similarity and relatedness ratings datasets (absolute values of correlations). There is a robust
advantage of the predict models.

the subtitle corpora (score = 91.2%). The top skip-gram
model was trained on the same corpus using the same
window size but had 300 dimensions. On average,

the CBOW models achieved a score of 73.4%
(SD = 10.9%) and the skip-gram models a score of 69.0%
(SD = 9.6%).

P. Mandera et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 57–78

Models trained on the subtitle corpora performed worse
on the TOEFL test than those trained on the UKWAC corpus
or on the concatenation of both corpora, in line with the
common sense prediction that the more we read the more
rare words we know. Like before, the count model showed
a strong decrease in precision with increasing window size.
There was a decrease for the predict models as well, but it
was less steep.
With a score of 87.5%, the semantic space from Baroni
et al. (2014) surpassed the vast majority of our models
on this task.
Dutch
Text corpus
We used the SONAR-500 text corpus (Oostdijk,
Reynaert, Hoste, & van den Heuvel, 2013) and a corpus of
movie subtitles to train the distributional semantic
models.
The SONAR-500 corpus is a 500 million words corpus of
contemporary Dutch and includes a wide variety of text
types. It is aimed at providing a balanced sample of standard Dutch based on textual materials from traditional
sources such as books, magazines and newspapers, as well
as Internet based sources (Wikipedia, websites, etc.).
Tokens from the SONAR-500 corpus were extracted
using the FoLIa toolkit.10 We found that the corpus contained a small number of duplicate documents. In order to
remove them from the corpus we ran the MinHash duplicate
detection using duometer within each category of texts in
the corpus. The final version of the SONAR-500 corpus, after
duplicate detection and applying our tokenization procedure
included 406 million tokens (1.9 million documents).
In order to compile the subtitle corpus, we downloaded
52,209 subtitle files. The corpus was cleaned in the same
way as the English subtitle corpus. The final Dutch subtitle
corpus contained about 26,618 documents and 130 million
tokens.
Finally, we combined the SONAR-500 corpus and the
subtitle corpus. As the SONAR-500 corpus also includes
movie subtitles, we only included documents from the
subtitle corpus that did not have a duplicate in the
SONAR-500 corpus. This resulted in a combined corpus of
530 million tokens (1.926 million documents).
Model training
We used the same procedure for training the semantic
spaces as the one used for the English corpora. For the
Dutch material, we only used the models with window
sizes of 1, 2, 3, 5 and 10, because our experience with the
evaluation of the English semantic spaces had shown that
the results vary most between the initial values and the
general trend in performance is similar at higher window
sizes.
When training the HAL-type count model, 300,000
types with the highest frequency were used as word and
contexts. The PPMI weighting scheme was applied to the
resulting co-occurrence matrix. The same parameter set10

http://proycon.github.io/folia/.

71

tings as for English were applied when training the predict
models. However, we trained only models with 200 and
300 dimensions.

Evaluation tasks
Semantic priming – method
Because there is no large, publicly available dataset of
semantic priming in Dutch, our analysis was limited to
two smaller datasets. The first one was based on a lexical
decision experiment conducted by Heyman, Van
Rensbergen, Storms, Hutchison, and De Deyne (2015),
which included 120 target words, each preceded by related
and unrelated words. We used only words from the low
memory load condition and for each prime–target pair
we used the average reaction times for the two SOAs
(1200 and 200 ms) used in the experiment. This resulted
in a dataset of 240 prime–target pairs with associated
RTs. For 236 of these pairs both the prime and the target
were present in our semantic spaces and were included
in further analyses.
The second dataset on which we based our analysis was
collected by Drieghe and Brysbaert (2002). This dataset
includes 21 target words with one semantically related
prime word and two unrelated primes (one that was
homophonic to the related prime and one that was completely unrelated). The small number of items in the second Dutch semantic priming dataset enabled only a very
simple evaluation. In order to calculate how well each of
the trained models fit the dataset we computed the distances between the primes and the targets for the related
and the unrelated conditions, and we performed t-tests
to verify whether the distances in the unrelated conditions
were larger than in the related condition, as is the case for
the human reaction times.

Semantic priming – results
In the dataset from Heyman et al. (2015) the baseline
model including log of word frequency and length for both
the prime and the target explained only 4.8% of the variance in reaction times. The average performance of the
models including various semantic predictors is presented
in Table 4.
The findings with the Dutch data are compatible with
what we observed in English. First, it is clear that the
semantic vectors improved the percentage of variance
accounted for. Even the worst performing model (count
model based on the subtitle corpus trained with window
size 10) did already 6% better (10.7% of the variance
explained; contribution of this semantic predictor: F
(1, 230) = 11.05, p = .001). The increased performance of
this model was confirmed in a Bayes factor analysis
(BF10 = 110).11
11
As in the case of the English semantic priming data analysis, the Bayes
factors are reported with reference to the optimal model that did not
include semantic measures but was based on lexical variables only. This
model included the logarithm of prime and target word frequency and was
strongly supported relative to a model including intercept only
(BF10 = 29.01).

72

P. Mandera et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 57–78

Table 4
Average results obtained from different classes of models for the words in different conditions in the two Dutch semantic priming experiments (Drieghe &
Brysbaert, 2002; Heyman et al., 2015). The first column lists the corpora on which the models were trained. The second column shows the different types of
models. The HAL-like count models using window sizes smaller and larger or equal to 5 are shown separately. Window sizes mattered less for the predict
models so they are all reported together. The next column reports the percentage of variance explained in the dataset from Heyman et al. (2015). The following
three columns display average effect sizes of comparisons between various conditions in the dataset from Drieghe and Brysbaert (2002). The last three columns
report the mean and standard deviation of the semantic distances between cues and targets in each of the conditions. All statistics are averaged over all
parameter settings used to train the models.
Drieghe et al.
Heyman et al.

Cohen’s d

Average distance

Corpus

Model

R2

Related vs
Control 1

Related vs
Control 2

Control 1 vs
Control 2

Related

Control 1

Control 2

SONAR-500

HAL w. <5
HAL w. P5
CBOW
Skip-gram

.148
.119
.191
.183

.92
.95
.73
.56

.98
1
.73
.82

.16
.15
.03
.45

.91 (SD = .05)
.91 (SD = .05)
.92 (SD = .06)
.81 (SD = .09)

.95 (SD = .02)
.95 (SD = .02)
.95 (SD = .01)
.85 (SD = .05)

.95 (SD = .02)
.95 (SD = .02)
.96 (SD = .01)
.87 (SD = .04)

SONAR-500 + subtitle-nl

HAL w. <5
HAL w. P5
CBOW
Skip-gram

.152
.125
.207
.194

.55
.43
1.34
1.44

.83
.62
1.25
1.38

.48
.4
.12
.08

.8 (SD = .1)
.84 (SD = .09)
.63 (SD = .16)
.57 (SD = .15)

.84 (SD = .05)
.87 (SD = .04)
.85 (SD = .08)
.81 (SD = .08)

.86 (SD = .04)
.89 (SD = .03)
.84 (SD = .1)
.81 (SD = .1)

Subtitle-nl

HAL w. <5
HAL w. P5
CBOW
Skip-gram

.140
.117
.172
.153

1.36
1.35
1.42
1.34

1.15
1.23
1.37
1.09

.38
.24
.11
.34

.47 (SD = .19)
.48 (SD = .14)
.38 (SD = .11)
.31 (SD = .13)

.77 (SD = .12)
.68 (SD = .08)
.58 (SD = .08)
.52 (SD = .11)

.72 (SD = .16)
.66 (SD = .09)
.57 (SD = .09)
.48 (SD = .14)

Second, also in line with the English data, on average
the CBOW model explained the most variance in RTs (on
average 19.1% of the variance explained), followed by the
skip-gram model (17.7% of the variance explained), and
the HAL-type count model (13.6% of the variance
explained).
Third, the performance of the count model depended
largely on the window size. The best performing count
model had a window size of 2, was trained on a concatenation of the subtitle and SONAR corpora, and explained
16.2% of the variance in the reaction times. The best skipgram model explained 20.7% of the variance. This model
had 200 dimensions and was trained on the concatenation
of the two corpora using window size 5. The best CBOW
relatedness measures, which explained 22.4% of the variance in RTs, had 200 dimensions and were trained on the
concatenation of the two corpora using window size 10.
In the Bayes factor regression we found that the best
model, overwhelmingly supported relative to the model
based on lexical variables only (BF10 = 197,283,867),
included the logarithm of prime and target word frequency
in addition to the semantic relatedness measure from the
best performing CBOW semantic space.
In a direct comparison of the relatedness measures
derived from each type of models (count, CBOW and
skip-gram), the Bayes factor analysis indicated a decisive
advantage of the model including relatedness measures
derived from the best CBOW model, relative to the model
including the best count relatedness measures
(BF10 = 1682) and substantial evidence in favor of the
CBOW relatedness measures relative to those derived from
the skip-gram model (BF10 = 8.4).
The dataset from Drieghe and Brysbaert (2002) contained a set of target words with one related prime and
two unrelated primes. Because the dataset was too small
to run analyses at the item level, we limited ourselves to

t-tests. Table 4 gives the average similarity scores for the
various models. It clearly shows that the semantic relatedness was larger in the related condition than in the unrelated conditions for all models. The situation was less
convincing for the HAL-type count models. As in all previous analyses, the addition of the subtitle corpus considerably improved the predictive power of the models. For
the best model, the difference in semantic distance
between the related and the unrelated primes had a standardized effect size of d = 1.4, which illustrates why the
semantic vectors are such an important predictor for
semantic priming studies.

Association norms – method
We used word association data from De Deyne and
Storms (2008), who reported the associates most frequently given to 1424 cue words. Like in the evaluation
of the English data, we computed the average relative
entropy between the probability distributions of the associates produced by our models and the human data.

Association norms – results
For the 1424 cue words from De Deyne and Storms
(2008), the baseline relative entropy score based on 10
randomly generated semantic spaces was 0.86 (SD = 0.0005;
lower is better).
The average relative entropy for the count models was
0.78 (SD = 0.01). The best performing count model had a
window size of 3 (trained on the SONAR-500 corpus),
resulting in a relative entropy of 0.76.
The average relative entropy for the CBOW models was
0.79 (SD = 0.03). The best performing model (relative
entropy = 0.74) was trained on the combined SONAR-500
and subtitle corpus, had 200 dimensions and a window
of size 10.

Table 5
Performance of the released English semantic spaces on the evaluation tasks.
Semantic priming project
Lexical decision

Naming

Associations
relative entropy

Model

N

R2 baseline

R2 model

R2 baseline

R2 model

Lemmas
Top 150,000
Full
Lemmas
Top 150,000
Top 300,000
Lemmas
Top 150,000
Full
Lemmas
Top 150,000
Top 300,000

Subtitle, CBOW, dim. 300, window 6
Subtitle, CBOW, dim. 300, window 6
Subtitle, CBOW, dim. 300, window 6
Subtitle, count, window 3
Subtitle, count, window 3
Subtitle, count, window 3
UKWAC + subtitle, CBOW, dim. 300, window 6
UKWAC + subtitle, CBOW, dim. 300, window 6
UKWAC + subtitle, CBOW, dim. 300, window 6
UKWAC + subtitle, count, window 1
UKWAC + subtitle, count, window 1
UKWAC + subtitle, count, window 1

5311
5738
5738
5311
5738
5738
5311
5738
5738
5311
5738
5738

.399
.389
.389
.399
.389
.389
.399
.389
.389
.399
.389
.389

.465
.455
.455
.471
.457
.457
.454
.445
.445
.458
.448
.448

.319
.312
.312
.319
.312
.312
.319
.312
.312
.319
.312
.312

.337
.331
.331
.339
.332
.332
.338
.331
.331
.336
.330
.330

.696
.698
.698
.696
.699
.699
.633
.636
.636
.708
.712
.712

Wordsim353
relatedness

Wordsim353
similarity

TOEFL

N

r

N

r

N

r

Score

999
998
999
999
998
999
999
998
999
998
998
998

.414
.412
.414
.106
.104
.106
.301
.3
.301
.289
.289
.289

236
238
238
236
238
238
236
238
238
236
238
238

.672
.671
.671
.382
.378
.378
.673
.676
.676
.54
.54
.54

196
196
196
196
196
196
196
196
196
196
196
196

.765
.765
.765
.581
.581
.581
.776
.776
.776
.71
.71
.71

.559
.663
.663
.494
.663
.659
.666
.834
.853
.628
.809
.828

Table 6
Performance of the released Dutch semantic spaces on the evaluation tasks. For the evaluation based on data from Heyman et al. (2015) all datasets included 236 prime–target pairs and the baseline model based on
lexical predictors explained 6.44% of the variance in RTs. The only exception consisted of models based on the 150,000 most frequent words which included 264 prime–target pairs (baseline model explained variance:
6.22%). All models based on Drieghe et al. (2015) included 63 pairs of words.
Drieghe et al.
Heyman et al.

Cohen’s d

Associations
relative
entropy

Average distance

Subset

Model

R2

Related vs
Control 1

Related vs
Control 2

Control 1 vs
Control 2

Related

Control 1

Control 2

Lemmas
Top 150,000
Top 300,000
Lemmas
Top 150,000
Top 300,000
Lemmas
Top 150,000
Full

SONAR-500, count, window 3
SONAR-500, count, window 3
SONAR-500, count, window 3
SONAR-500 + subtitle, count, window 2
SONAR-500 + subtitle, count, window 2
SONAR-500 + subtitle, count, window 2
SONAR-500 + subtitle, CBOW, dim. 200, window 10
SONAR-500 + subtitle, CBOW, dim. 200, window 10
SONAR-500 + subtitle, CBOW, dim. 200, window 10

.143
.143
.143
.162
.162
.162
.224
.222
.224

.832
.832
.832
.991
.991
.991
1.532
1.532
1.532

.976
.976
.976
1.03
1.03
1.03
1.542
1.542
1.542

.334
.334
.334
.156
.156
.156
.044
.044
.044

.883 (SD = .062)
.883 (SD = .062)
.883 (SD = .062)
.905 (SD = .050)
.905 (SD = .050)
.905 (SD = .050)
.633 (SD = .149)
.633 (SD = .149)
.633 (SD = .149)

.925 (SD = .027)
.925 (SD = .027)
.925 (SD = .027)
.947 (SD = .017)
.947 (SD = .017)
.947 (SD = .017)
.904 (SD = .069)
.904 (SD = .069)
.904 (SD = .069)

.934 (SD = .024)
.934 (SD = .024)
.934 (SD = .024)
.950 (SD = .020)
.950 (SD = .020)
.950 (SD = .020)
.907 (SD = .068)
.907 (SD = .068)
.907 (SD = .068)

.766
.764
.765
.774
.772
.773
.745
.739
.743

P. Mandera et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 57–78

Subset

Simlex-999

73

74

P. Mandera et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 57–78

The average relative entropy for the skip-gram models
was 0.80 (SD = 0.02) and the best performing model had
the same parameters as the best performing CBOW model
(relative entropy = 0.75).
Influence of the window size
Our analyses indicated that the size of the window used
to train the HAL-type count models is an extremely important parameter when training these models. At the same
time, it has to be acknowledged that the count and the predict models use the window size parameter differently
during training. While the typical count model considers
full window size for each target word, the predict models
per trial randomly choose a number between 1 and the
requested window size and use that randomly chosen
number as the window size for the training. This allows
these models to utilize information about distant words
but at the same time the average window size is reduced
by half and the more distant words are included less often.
To verify whether this aspect of the training can be responsible for the sharp drop in the performance of the count
models that was not observed in the predict models we
decided to train an additional set of count models using
window sizes 1, 2, 3, 5, 7 and 10, on the English subtitle
corpus and its concatenation with the UKWAC corpus.
However, for this analysis we applied an analogous procedure of randomly choosing window size in each training
step as is the case for the predict models.
As could be expected, we observed that using a randomized window size for training the count spaces
decreased the speed at which performance of the spaces
to predict semantic priming (Fig. 2) data dropped with
increasing window size. Nevertheless, the performance
was still best at window size 3, even when a randomized
window size was used. The improvement of using reduced
window sizes was largest for the largest window sizes – for
window size 10 the amount of explained variance
increased by 0.7% (subtitle corpus) and 0.6% (concatenation of the corpora) in LDT and by 0.1% for naming (both
subtitle corpus and the concatenation).
This analysis indicates that the random reduction of the
window size attenuates the decreasing performance of the
count models, making them more comparable to the predict models even for larger window sizes. However, the
general trend of optimal performance with a window size
of about 3 can still be observed.

Discussion
In this article we compared the performance of the
recently proposed predict models of semantic similarity
to the methods currently used in psycholinguistics by
looking at how much variance the estimates explain in
human performance data. In all cases, we saw an outcome
that was at least equal to the existing measures and that
was often superior to them. This was even true when we
compared the measures based on semantic spaces to measures produced by human participants (e.g., word association norms or semantic features generated by

participants), showing that the semantic vectors should
be included in psycholinguistic research.
In line with previous findings (Baroni et al., 2014; Levy
& Goldberg, 2014), the predict models were generally
superior to the count models, although the best count
models tended to come quite close to the predict models
(and in a few cases even exceeded them). The most important variable for the count models was window size, as
shown by Bullinaria and Levy (2007, 2012). A problem in
this respect, unfortunately, is that the optimal window size
seems to depend on the task. It equals 3 for semantic priming, 1 for semantic relatedness judgments, and 2 for the
prediction of word associations. The performance rapidly
drops for non-optimal window sizes, as shown in Figs. 2–
4. At the same time, our additional analysis indicated that
applying the same procedure of randomly selecting window sizes, as done in the predict models, may be a way
to attenuate the decrease in performance for larger window sizes.
In contrast, the predict models are less influenced by
window size. In addition, their performance generally
increases with window size (certainly up to 5). Of these
models, the CBOW models typically outperformed the
skip-gram models and there are no indications in the data
we looked at to prefer the latter over the former. In general,
there was little gain when the dimensions of the CBOW
model exceeded 300 (sometimes performance even started
to decrease; this was particularly true for semantic priming and word associations).
Given the superior performance of the CBOW models, it
is important to understand the mechanisms underlying
them. As a practical example of the CBOW model, we discuss the model that had the best average performance for
English and that we also recommend for general use in
psycholinguistic research (see also the section on availability below). This model is trained on the combined UKWAC
and subtitle corpus, has a window size of 6, and contains
300 dimensions. There are input and output nodes for each
word form in the corpus encountered at least 5 times, leading to about 904 thousand input and output nodes. The
dimensionality of the model is equal to the number of hidden nodes, which in this case is 300. The training of the
model consists of the activation of the input nodes of the
6 words before the target word and the 6 words after the
target word and predicting the activation of the output
node corresponding to the target node. Over successive
runs, the weights are adapted to improve performance.
The semantic vector for a word consists of the 300 weights
between the input node of a word and the hidden nodes
after learning.
As shown in Fig. 1, the CBOW model learns to predict
the relationship between the target word and all words
in the surrounding window simultaneously. In the HALtype count model and in the skip-gram model, the relationship between the target word and each word in the
window is trained individually. As a metaphor, consider a
paper with a long set of co-authors of which one has been
removed. The task is to predict the missing author. The
HAL-type count model and the skip-gram model can only
predict the missing author based on the individual

P. Mandera et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 57–78

co-occurrence between each known co-author and their
past co-authors, which could result in the predicted coauthor being completely unrelated to the other coauthors on the paper. The CBOW model, on the other hand,
would predict the missing author based on the simultaneous consideration of all other co-authors on the paper. The
model would be more likely to predict a co-author who
often writes together with all or part of the co-authors than
someone who frequently co-authors with only one of
them.
In light of the current findings, it is important to understand the differences between the discussed models in
Marr’s (1982) terms. The count model specifies a computational problem for the cognitive system (learning to associate semantically related words) and provides an abstract
computational method for solving it using weighting
schemes and dimensionality reduction. It has been argued
(Levy & Goldberg, 2014) that the results of the skip-gram
model can also be achieved by a certain type of a count
model (PMI weighting shifted by a constant and dimensionality reduction steps) making the skip-gram model
computationally equivalent to a count model. However,
because the skip-gram model can be specified using
prediction-based incremental learning principles in a neural network, it solves the computational problem posed by
the count models in a way that is to a large extent psychologically plausible. Finally, although the CBOW model
shares this algorithmic-level plausibility with the skipgram model, CBOW cannot be reduced to a count model
(Levy et al., 2015). Since the CBOW model compares favorably to the other investigated models it is an important
task for future research to better understand this model
at the computational level.
In this paper, we gave considerable attention to the type
of corpus used to train a model. In computational linguistics, models are often found to perform best when trained
on very large corpora (Banko & Brill, 2001) and this implies
that register is second to size. Our data show that the large
corpora typically used in computational linguistics are
good for vocabulary tests, such as TOEFL but perform less
well for psycholinguistic benchmarks such as semantic
priming or word associate generation. On these tasks, corpora based on subtitles of films and television series perform better. When we consider what the TOEFL test
requires, it is not surprising that training on very large corpora containing a large amount of specialist material is
beneficial. Because TOEFL includes a large number of
uncommon words, models trained on subtitle corpora
can be expected to perform worse on this test. Indeed,
we would expect a person reading the material included
in the very large corpus to score quite highly on the TOEFL
and we would be equally unsurprised if a person watching
only films and television series would perform worse. In
contrast, the impressive performance of the relatively
small corpora of subtitles on the semantic priming and
word association tasks is surprising. This implies that
when it comes to accounting for human behavior it is
important to train models on a corpus that has a register
closer to what humans experience. Recall that the TOEFL
benchmark is not about predicting how well humans do,
but about scoring as highly as possible. Associations in

75

the larger corpus better reflect the semantic system for
someone who scores very well on the TOEFL, whereas
associations based on the subtitle corpus reflect more of
a central tendency. As an example, our reference CBOW
model based on subtitles generates the following words
as nearest semantic neighbors for elephant: giraffe, tusk,
zoo, and hippo. On the other hand, the model trained on
the combined UKWAC and subtitles corpus generates howdah, tusked, rhinoceros, and mahout. The first and second
authors of this paper confess that they did not know what
to make of two of the latter associations until they learned
that a howdah is a seat for riding on the back of an elephant
and that a mahout is a professional elephant rider. The
example clearly illustrates how the models based on the
larger corpora score higher on the TOEFL. Future research
could investigate whether the advantage of the larger corpora is still maintained when the actual human responses
are the benchmark instead of the highest score.
On the basis of the current study, conclusions about the
relationship between corpus register and size and human
performance are risky because these variables were not
independent of each other. Still, it seems possible to conclude that given that the subtitle corpora are smaller and
in many cases perform better on predicting semantic priming, the register of the subtitles better represents the input
of human participants. On the other hand, the question
remains what precisely in the bigger corpora accounts for
the worse performance. Even adding subtitle material to
the large UKWAC corpus did not result in models that predicted semantic priming much better than the subtitle corpus alone (and a similar finding was observed in Dutch). An
answer may be that the smaller subtitle corpus results in
close semantic relationships that are shared by many participants, while the large corpus results in more specialized
semantic relationships that are known by only a few participants. This additionally suggest that increasing the size
of a subtitle corpus further may not necessarily result in
better performance on a semantic priming task because
more specialized semantic relationships could be developed at the expense of more universally shared ones. This
point is given further weight by taking into account that
corpora over a certain size stop being ecologically
realistic.12
Given the current set of results, we can unequivocally
assert that distributional semantics can successfully
explain semantic priming data, dispelling earlier claims
(Hutchison et al., 2008). While Günther et al. (2016) found
small effects for German, we obtain a strong and robust
increase in the predictive power when the regression analysis includes semantic information derived from distributional semantics models. According to our analyses the
predictions based on the semantic space models can match
or exceed the ones based on human association datasets or
feature norms. This is fortunate, because semantic similarity measures based on semantic spaces are available for
many more words than human similarity or relatedness
12
Assuming a maximum reading rate of 300 words per minute (Carver,
1989; Lewandowski, Codding, Kleinmann, & Tucker, 2003), a person who
has read 16 h per day for 18 years, has come across
300 ⁄ 60 ⁄ 16 ⁄ 365.25 ⁄ 18 = 1.89 billion words at most.

76

P. Mandera et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 57–78

ratings and can be collected more easily for languages that
do not yet have human ratings. In this regard, we should
also point to recent advances in human data collection.
For instance, collecting more than one response for each
cue word in a word association task may lead to a more
refined semantic network than the one we tested (De
Deyne et al., 2015). It will be interesting to see how such
a dataset compares to the semantic vectors we calculated.
Finally, it is of practical importance to mention that, at
least for the semantic priming data, the pioneering LSA
space available through a web-interface at the University
of Colorado Boulder (1997) does not perform better than
the reference semantic spaces we are releasing with the
current paper. At the same time, it is surprising that the
difference in performance is so small if we consider the
size of the corpus (11 million words) on which the LSA
space was based. The relative success of LSA based on the
small TASA corpus suggests that books used in schools
are another interesting source of input (arguably because
it is a common denominator. These books and subjects
have been read by most students).

performing in the present evaluations. Each of the spaces is
released in a format compatible with our interface. The
predict spaces can be also used with the LSAfun (Günther
et al., 2015) interface.
In addition to the full semantic spaces for English and
Dutch used for the present study we also make available
smaller subspaces which may be very useful in many cases,
as they can be explored using very limited computational
resources. The smaller semantic spaces are based on two
subsets of the full spaces:
 a subset of the 150,000 most frequent words in each of
the spaces,
 a subset based on the lemmas found in the corpora.
Information about how well each of the released
semantic spaces performed on our evaluation tasks is
shown in Tables 5 (for English) and 6 (for Dutch).
As semantic spaces can always be improved by finding
superior methods or parameter settings, we know that the
spaces that we trained can and will be outperformed by
other spaces. Our interface fully encourages such
developments.

Availability
Acknowledgment
A big obstacle to the widespread use of distributional
semantics in psycholinguistics has been the gap between
the producers and potential consumers of such spaces.
Although several packages have been published that allow
users to train various kinds of semantic spaces (e.g. SSpace, Jurgens & Stevens, 2010; DISSECT, Dinu, Pham, &
Baroni, 2013; LMOSS, Recchia & Jones, 2009; HIDEX,
Shaoul & Westbury, 2006), the large corpora and computational infrastructure as well as the technical know-how
regarding training and evaluating semantic spaces is not
available to many psycholinguists. Therefore, in order to
encourage the exchange and use of semantic spaces
trained by various research groups, we release a simple
interface that can be used to measure relatedness between
words on the basis of semantic spaces. Importantly, it can
be used both as a standalone program and as a web-server
that makes the semantic spaces available over the Internet.
We believe that such an open-source contribution complements the existing ecosystem allowing researchers to train
and explore semantic spaces (e.g. LSAfun; Günther,
Dudschig, & Kaup, 2015). We encourage contribution from
other researchers to the code base for our interface, which
is hosted on a platform for sharing and collaborative development of programming projects.13
To make it as easy as possible for the authors of semantic spaces to work with our interface, two simple formats
are used: the Character Separated Values (CSV) format
and the matrix market format14 that supports efficient representations of sparse matrices such as those created when
training count models without dimensionality reduction.
We release a series of predict and count spaces for
Dutch and English that were found to be consistently well
13

The code is available at the address: http://crr.ugent.be/snaut/.
For more information about the matrix market format see: http://math.
nist.gov/MatrixMarket/.
14

This research was made possible by an Odysseus grant
from the Government of Flanders.
References
Agirre, E., Alfonseca, E., Hall, K., Kravalova, J., Pasßca, M., & Soroa, A. (2009).
A study on similarity and relatedness using distributional and
WordNet-based approaches. In Proceedings of human language
technologies: The 2009 annual conference of the North American
chapter of the association for computational linguistics (pp. 19–27).
Association for Computational Linguistics. <http://dl.acm.org/citation.
cfm?id=1620758>.
Almuhareb, A. (2006). Attributes in lexical acquisition. Doctoral
dissertation, University of Essex.
Baayen, R. H., Milin, P., Filipovic Durdevic, D., Hendrix, P., & Marelli, M.
(2011). An amorphous model for morphological processing in visual
comprehension based on naive discriminative learning. Psychological
Review, 118, 438–482.
Balota, D. A., Cortese, M. J., Sergent-Marshall, S. D., Spieler, D. H., & Yap, M.
(2004). Visual word recognition of single-syllable words. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 133(2), 283–316. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1037/0096-3445.133.2.283.
Balota, D. A., Yap, M. J., Hutchison, K. A., & Cortese, M. J. (2012).
Megastudies: Large scale analysis of lexical processes. In J. S. Adelman
(Ed.), Visual word recognition. Models and methods, orthography and
phonology (Vol. 1). Hove, England: Psychology Press.
Balota, D. A., Yap, M. J., Hutchison, K. A., Cortese, M. J., Kessler, B., Loftis, B.,
... Treiman, R. (2007). The English lexicon project. Behavior Research
Methods, 39(3), 445–459.
Banko, M., & Brill, E. (2001). Scaling to very very large corpora for natural
language disambiguation. In Proceedings of the 39th annual meeting on
association for computational linguistics (pp. 26–33). Association for
Computational
Linguistics.
<http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=
1073017>.
Baroni, M., Barbu, E., Murphy, B., & Poesio, M. (2010). Strudel: A
distributional semantic model based on properties and types.
Cognitive Science, 34(2), 222–254.
Baroni, M., Evert, S., & Lenci, A. (Eds.). (2008). Bridging the gap between
semantic theory and computational simulations: Proceedings of the
ESSLLI workshop on distributional lexical semantic. FOLLI, Hamburg.
Baroni, M., Dinu, G., & Kruszewski, G. (2014). Don’t count, predict! A
systematic comparison of context-counting vs context-predicting
semantic vectors. In Proceedings of the 52nd annual meeting of the
association for computational linguistics (Vol. 1). <http://clic.

P. Mandera et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 57–78
cimec.unitn.it/marco/publications/acl2014/baroni-etal-countpredictacl2014.pdf>.
Baroni, M., & Lenci, A. (2010). Distributional memory: A general
framework for corpus-based semantics. Computational Linguistics, 36
(4), 673–721.
Broder, A. Z. (1997). On the resemblance and containment of documents.
In Compression and complexity of sequences 1997. Proceedings (pp. 21–
29). IEEE. <http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=
666900>.
Bruni, E., Tran, N.-K., & Baroni, M. (2014). Multimodal distributional
semantics. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 49, 1–47.
Brysbaert, M., Buchmeier, M., Conrad, M., Jacobs, A. M., Bölte, J., & Böhl, A.
(2011). The word frequency effect: A review of recent developments
and implications for the choice of frequency estimates in German.
Experimental Psychology, 58, 412–424.
Brysbaert, M., Keuleers, E., & New, B. (2011). Assessing the usefulness of
Google Books’ word frequencies for psycholinguistic research on
word processing. Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 27.
Brysbaert, M., & New, B. (2009). Moving beyond Kučera and Francis: A
critical evaluation of current word frequency norms and the
introduction of a new and improved word frequency measure for
American English. Behavior Research Methods, 41(4), 977–990. http://
dx.doi.org/10.3758/BRM.41.4.977.
Brysbaert, M., New, B., & Keuleers, E. (2012). Adding Part-of-Speech
information to the SUBTLEX-US word frequencies. Behavior Research
Methods, 44, 991–997.
Bullinaria, J. A., & Levy, J. P. (2007). Extracting semantic representations
from word co-occurrence statistics: A computational study. Behavior
Research Methods, 39(3), 510–526.
Bullinaria, J. A., & Levy, J. P. (2012). Extracting semantic representations
from word co-occurrence statistics: Stop-lists, stemming, and SVD.
Behavior Research Methods, 44(3), 890–907.
Carver, R. P. (1989). Silent reading rates in grade equivalents. Journal of
Literacy Research, 21(2), 155–166.
Chiarello, C., Burges, C., Richards, L., & Pollock, A. (1990). Word association
norms, mutual information, and lexicography. Brain and Language, 38
(1), 75–104.
Church, K. W., & Hanks, P. (1990). Word association norms, mutual
information, and lexicography. Computational Linguistics, 16(1),
22–29.
Coltheart, M., Davelaar, E., Jonasson, J., & Besner, D. (1977). Access to the
internal lexicon. In S. Dornic (Ed.), Attention and performance VI
(pp. 535–555). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cronbach, L. J., & Furby, L. (1970). How we should measure ‘‘change”: Or
should we? Psychological Bulletin, 74(1), 68–80.
De Deyne, S., & Storms, G. (2008). Word associations: Norms for 1,424
Dutch words in a continuous task. Behavior Research Methods, 40(1),
198–205. http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/BRM.40.1.198.
De Deyne, S., Verheyen, S., & Storms, G. (2015). The role of corpus size and
syntax in deriving lexico-semantic representations for a wide range of
concepts. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 68(8),
1643–1664. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2014.994098.
Dinu, G., Pham, N., & Baroni, M. (2013). DISSECT: Distributional semantics
composition toolkit. In Proceedings of the system demonstrations of ACL
2013 (51st annual meeting of the association for computational
linguistics) (pp. 31–36). East Stroudsburg, PA: ACL.
Drieghe, D., & Brysbaert, M. (2002). Strategic effects in associative priming
with words, homophones, and pseudohomophones. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28(5),
951–961. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037//0278-7393.28.5.951.
Ferraresi, A., Zanchetta, E., Baroni, M., & Bernardini, S. (2008). Introducing
and evaluating ukWaC, a very large web-derived corpus of English. In
Proceedings of the 4th web as corpus workshop (WAC-4) can we beat
Google (pp. 47–54). <http://www.researchgate.net/profile/Adam_
Kilgarriff/publication/237127354_Proceedings_of_the_4_th_Web_as_
Corpus_Workshop_(WAC4)_Can_we_beat_Google/links/00b7d529064
7fbc33f000000.pdf#page=53>.
Goldberg, Y., & Levy, O. (2014). word2vec Explained: Deriving Mikolov
et al.’s negative-sampling word-embedding method. Available from
arXiv:1402.3722.
Günther, F., Dudschig, C., & Kaup, B. (2015). LSAfun – An R package for
computations based on Latent Semantic Analysis. Behavior Research
Methods, 47(4), 930–944. http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/s13428-0140529-0.
Günther, F., Dudschig, C., & Kaup, B. (2016). Latent semantic analysis
cosines as a cognitive similarity measure: Evidence from priming
studies. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 69(4),
626–653. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2015.1038280.
Harris, Z. (1954). Distributional structure. Word, 10(2–3), 146–162.

77

Heyman, T., Van Rensbergen, B., Storms, G., Hutchison, K. A., & De Deyne,
S. (2015). The influence of working memory load on semantic
priming. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 41(3), 911–920. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/xlm0000050.
Hill, F., Reichart, R., & Korhonen, A. (2014). Simlex-999: Evaluating
semantic models with (genuine) similarity estimation. Available from
arXiv:1408.3456.
Hinton, G. E. (2007). Learning multiple layers of representation. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 11(10), 428–434. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
tics.2007.09.004.
Hinton, G. E., & Salakhutdinov, R. R. (2006). Reducing the dimensionality
of data with neural networks. Science, 313(5786), 504–507. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1126/science.1127647.
Hodgson, J. M. (1991). Informational constraints on pre-lexical priming.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 6, 169–205.
Hutchison, K. A., Balota, D. A., Cortese, M. J., & Watson, J. M. (2008).
Predicting semantic priming at the item level. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 61(7), 1036–1066. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
17470210701438111.
Hutchison, K. A., Balota, D. A., Neely, J. H., Cortese, M. J., Cohen-Shikora, E.
R., Tse, C.-S., ... Buchanan, E. (2013). The semantic priming project.
Behavior Research Methods, 45(4), 1099–1114. http://dx.doi.org/
10.3758/s13428-012-0304-z.
Jones, M. N., Kintsch, W., & Mewhort, D. J. K. (2006). High-dimensional
semantic space accounts of priming. Journal of Memory and Language,
55(4), 534–552. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2006.07.003.
Juhasz, B. J., Lai, Y.-H., & Woodcock, M. L. (2015). A database of 629
English compound words: Ratings of familiarity, lexeme meaning
dominance, semantic transparency, age of acquisition, imageability,
and sensory experience. Behavior Research Methods, 47(4),
1004–1019. http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/s13428-014-0523-6.
Jurgens, D., & Stevens, K. (2010). The S-Space package: An open source
package for word space models. In Proceedings of the ACL 2010 system
demonstrations (pp. 30–35). Association for Computational
Linguistics. <http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1858939>.
Kass, R. E., & Raftery, A. E. (1995). Bayes factors. Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 430(90), 773–795.
Keuleers, E., & Balota, D. A. (2015). Megastudies, crowdsourcing, and large
datasets in psycholinguistics: An overview of recent developments.
The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 68(8), 1457–1468.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2015.1051065.
Keuleers, E., Brysbaert, M., & New, B. (2010). SUBTLEX-NL: A new measure
for Dutch word frequency based on film subtitles. Behavior
Research Methods, 42(3), 643–650. http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/
BRM.42.3.643.
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to Plato’s problem: The
latent semantic analysis theory of acquisition, induction, and
representation of knowledge. Psychological Review, 104(2), 211.
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., & Hinton, G. (2015). Deep learning. Nature, 521
(7553), 436–444. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature14539.
Levy, O., & Goldberg, Y. (2014). Neural word embedding as implicit matrix
factorization. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp.
2177–2185).
Levy, J. P., Bullinaria, J. A., & Patel, M. (1998). Explorations in the
derivation of semantic representations from word co-occurrence
statistics. South Pacific Journal of Psychology, 10(1), 99–111.
Levy, O., Goldberg, Y., Dagan, I., & Ramat-Gan, I. (2015). Improving
distributional similarity with lessons learned from word embeddings.
Transactions of the association for computational linguistics (Vol. 3).
<http://u.cs.biu.ac.il/~nlp/wp-content/uploads/ImprovingDistributional-Similarity-TACL-2015.pdf>.
Lewandowski, L. J., Codding, R. S., Kleinmann, A. E., & Tucker, K. L. (2003).
Assessment of reading rate in postsecondary students. Journal of
Psychoeducational Assessment, 21(2), 134–144.
Liang, F., Paulo, R., Molina, G., Clyde, M. A., & Berger, J. O. (2008). Mixtures
of g priors for Bayesian variable selection. Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 103(481), 410–423. http://dx.doi.org/10.1198/
016214507000001337.
Lund, K., & Burgess, C. (1996). Producing high-dimensional semantic
spaces from lexical co-occurrence. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 28(2), 203–208.
Lund, K., Burgess, C., & Atchley, R. A. (1995). Semantic and associative
priming in high-dimensional semantic space. Proceedings of the
cognitive science society (pp. 660–665). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Mandera, P., Keuleers, E., & Brysbaert, M. (2015). How useful are corpusbased methods for extrapolating psycholinguistic variables?. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 68(8), 1623–1642. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2014.988735.

78

P. Mandera et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 92 (2017) 57–78

Mandera, P., Keuleers, E., Wodniecka, Z., & Brysbaert, M. (2015). Subtlexpl: Subtitle-based word frequency estimates for Polish. Behavior
Research Methods, 47(2), 471–483. http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/s13428014-0489-4.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision: A computational approach. San Francisco: Freeman
& Co.
McDonald, S., & Brew, C. (2004). A distributional model of semantic
context effects in lexical processing. In D. Scott, W. Daelemans, & M.
A. Walker (Eds.), ACL (pp. 17–24). ACL. <http://dblp.uni-trier.de/
db/conf/acl/acl2004.html#McDonaldB04>.
McRae, K., Cree, G. S., Seidenberg, M. S., & McNorgan, C. (2005). Semantic
feature production norms for a large set of living and nonliving things.
Behavior Research Methods, 37(4), 547–559.
McRae, K., Spivey-Knowlton, M., & Tanenhaus, M. (1998). Modeling the
influence of thematic fit (and other constraints) in on-line sentence
comprehension. Journal of Memory and Language, 38, 283–312.
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., & Dean, J. (2013). Efficient estimation
of word representations in vector space. Available from arXiv:1301.
3781 [cs].
Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G. S., & Dean, J. (2013).
Distributed representations of words and phrases and their
compositionality. In Advances in neural information processing
systems (pp. 3111–3119).
Miller, R. R., Barnet, R. C., & Grahame, N. J. (1995). Assessment of the
Rescorla–Wagner model. Psychological Bulletin, 117(3), 363–386.
Nelson, D. L., McEvoy, C. L., & Schreiber, T. A. (1998). The University of
South Florida word association, rhyme, and word fragment norms.
<http://w3.usf.edu/FreeAssociation/>.
Olshausen, B. A., & Field, D. J. (1996). Emergence of simple-cell receptive
field properties by learning a sparse code for natural images. Nature,
381, 607–609.
Oostdijk, N., Reynaert, M., Hoste, V., & van den Heuvel, H. (2013). SoNaR
user
documentation.
<http://ticclops.uvt.nl/SoNaR_enduser_documentation_v.1.0.4.pdf>.
Padó, S., & Lapata, M. (2007). Dependency-based construction of semantic
space models. Computational Linguistics, 33(2), 161–199.
Patel et al. (1997). ESRLTC.ps. <https://www.cs.bham.ac.uk/~jxb/PUBS/
ESRLTC.ps> Retrieved 27.04.15.
Recchia, G., & Jones, M. N. (2009). More data trumps smarter algorithms:
Comparing pointwise mutual information with latent semantic
analysis. Behavior Research Methods, 41(3), 647–656. http://dx.doi.
org/10.3758/BRM.41.3.647.

Recchia, G., & Louwerse, M. M. (2015). Reproducing affective norms with
lexical co-occurrence statistics: Predicting valence, arousal, and
dominance. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 68(8),
1584–1598. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2014.941296.
Rehuřek, R., & Sojka, P. (2010). Software framework for topic modelling
with large corpora. In Proceedings of the LREC 2010 workshop on new
challenges for NLP frameworks (pp. 45–50). Valletta, Malta: ELRA.
Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A theory of Pavlovian conditioning:
Variations
in
the
effectiveness
of
reinforcement
and
nonreinforcement. In A. H. Black & W. F. Prokasy (Eds.), Classical
conditioning II: Current research and theory (pp. 64–99). New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Rouder, J. N., & Morey, R. D. (2012). Default Bayes factors for model
selection in regression. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 47(6),
877–903. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00273171.2012.734737.
Rubenstein, H., & Goodenough, J. (1965). Contextual correlates of
synonymy. Communications of the ACM, 8(10), 627–633.
Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., & Williams, R. (1986). Learning
representations by back-propagating errors. Nature, 323, 533–536.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/323533a0.
Shaoul, C., & Westbury, C. (2006). Word frequency effects in highdimensional co-occurrence models: A new approach. Behavior
Research Methods, 38(2), 190–195.
Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (1981). Toward a modern theory of adaptive
networks: Expectation and prediction. Psychological Review, 88(2),
135–170.
Testolin, A., Stoianov, I., Sperduti, A., & Zorzi, M. (2015). Learning
orthographic structure with sequential generative neural networks.
Cognitive Science. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/cogs.12258 (Advance
online publication).
Wagenmakers, E.-J. (2007). A practical solution to the pervasive problems
of p values. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14(5), 779–804.
Widrow, G., & Hoff, M. E. (1960). Adaptive switching circuits (pp. 96–104).
Institute of Radio Engineers, Western Electronic Show and
Convention, Convention Record, Part 4.
Zorzi, M., Testolin, A., & Stoianov, I. P. (2013). Modeling language and
cognition with deep unsupervised learning: A tutorial overview.
Frontiers in Psychology, 4. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00515.

