Current Research in Behavioral Sciences 8 (2025) 100168

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Current Research in Behavioral Sciences
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/crbeha

Semantic analysis of test items through large language model embeddings
predicts a-priori factorial structure of personality tests
Nicola Milano * , Maria Luongo, Michela Ponticorvo, Davide Marocco
Department of Humanistic Studies, Natural and Artificial Cognition Laboratory “Orazio Miglino”, University of Naples Federico II, via Porta di Massa 1, Naples 80125,
Italy

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Semantic similarity
Language models
Machine learning
Content validity
Dimensionality reduction
Test items analysis

In this article, we explore the use of Large Language Models (LLMs) for predicting factor loadings in personality
tests through the semantic analysis of test items. By leveraging text embeddings generated from LLMs, we
evaluate the semantic similarity of test items and their alignment with hypothesized factorial structures without
depending on human response data. Our methodology involves using embeddings from four different personality
test to examine correlations between item semantics and their grouping in principal factors. Our results indicate
that LLM-derived embeddings can effectively capture semantic similarities among test items, showing moderate
to high correlation with the factorial structure produced by humans respondents in all tests, potentially serving
as a valid measure of content validity for initial survey design and refinement. This approach offers valuable
insights into the robustness of embedding techniques in psychological evaluations, showing a significant cor­
relation with traditional test structures and providing a novel perspective on test item analysis.

1. Introduction
The linkage between natural language and psychology has a long
history. In 1884, Galton was the first scientist to explicitly propose the
"lexical hypothesis," stating: "the most important individual differences
in human transactions will come to be encoded as single terms in some
or all of the world’s languages" (Galton, 1884; Goldberg, 1992). Since
Galton’s seminal paper, many scientists have attempted to empirically
develop a list of personality-descriptive terms present in the lexicon and
to appreciate the extent to which trait terms share aspects of their
meanings. This research led to the classical works in personality psy­
chology by Allport and Odbert (1936), Cattell (1943), Norman (1967),
and finally Goldberg (1992), which summarized decades of previous
research in the Big Five personality questionnaire.
Recently, the rise of increasingly powerful machine learning (ML)
methods (Dumais et al., 2012; Mikolov et al., 2013) has established the
use of ML algorithms in the field of natural language processing (NLP),
significantly impacting language-based psychological research methods
(Arnulf et al., 2014, 2020, 2021; Gefen and Larsen, 2017). The first ML
methods were based on single word-vector embeddings, where a single
word is represented as a vector, also called an embedding vector, in a
multi-dimensional space, and words sharing semantic meanings have

similar embedding representations. Two famous algorithms of this kind
are latent semantic analysis (LSA) (Dumais et al., 2012) and Word2Vec
(W2V) (Mikolov et al., 2013). Even though context was not considered
in the word embedded representation, Arnulf et al. (2014) showed how
LSA-based semantic algorithms allowed remarkably precise prediction
of survey responses from humans in organizational behavior tests,
though they failed in personality tests.
In recent years, previous approaches to computational text analysis
have been revolutionized by the advent of transformer-based large
language models (LLMs) such as the GPT (Generative Pre-trained
Transformer) series (Vaswani et al., 2017; Radford et al., 2019) and
BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers)
(Devlin et al., 2019). These models have significantly enhanced the
ability of machine learning models to “understand” and analyze large
volumes of texts. They are designed to capture embedding vectors rep­
resenting the semantics of entire sentences instead of single words,
extrapolating meanings and deeply understanding large texts. They
work by transforming sentences into high-dimensional embedding
vectors that capture the linguistic properties of sentences or preserve the
essence of the text and its contextual relationships (Devlin et al., 2019;
Reimers and Gurevych, 2019).
Based on this premise, our work tries to analyze deeply new LLMs

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: nicola.milano@unina.it (N. Milano).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crbeha.2025.100168
Received 9 July 2024; Received in revised form 17 January 2025; Accepted 23 January 2025
Available online 25 January 2025
2666-5182/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync-nd/4.0/).

N. Milano et al.

Current Research in Behavioral Sciences 8 (2025) 100168

findings for psychological assessment using validated personality test.
More explicitly, our research questions are: Do psychometric tests work
because test items unveil the semantic structure already present in the
sentence used to describe behavioral characteristics? Can we use LLMs
as a preliminary validation measure of a psychometric test, predicting
the factorial structures that we will find in human respondents?
Starting from these questions, we first recall the classical process of
psychometric test validation and clarify how modern AI methods can be
integrated into the process. Then, we exhaustively present the compu­
tational methods used to prove our points and the psychometric test that
we analyzed with them in the methods section. Our findings are reported
in the results section, and in the conclusions, we discuss the impact and
future directions of our work.

assessing the relative proportion of items measuring different
aspects of the construct;
(4) Appropriateness of test construction procedures, which involves
observing the various development, selection, and quality control
procedures involved in constructing the instrument. Elements
investigated in evaluating these procedures include the training
of those who write the items, qualitative and statistical criteria
for item selection, screening for potentially biased items, and
quality control of items to ensure accurate scoring (Koller et al.,
2017). Rossiter (2008), showed that prioritizing content validity
is fundamental for the construction of a test. Content validity is a
crucial measure that is fundamentally entangled with construct
validity and predictive validity of a test outcome; Rossiter argued
that much research suffers from inadequate content validation
and unnecessary statistical purification, which reduces their
validity (Rossiter, 2008). Also he criticizes the practice of using
statistical methods like factor analysis for item selection, arguing
that these methods can dilute content validity. Many others
method to assess content validity have been proposed during the
years (Crocker et al., 1989; Martone and Sireci, 2009, Spoto et al.,
2023; El-Den et al., 2020); in this work we try to integrate modern
artificial intelligence method for language comprehension in the
context of Rossiter’s view of content validation of psychometrics
tests.

1.1. Psychometrics test validation process
The validation process of a psychometric test aims at providing a
solid scientific basis for the proposed score interpretations, which usu­
ally begins by specifying the construct that the test intends to measure.
Within this framework, Classical Test Theory (CTT) has provided
core contribution for a long time, emphasizing the importance of reli­
ability and validity in assessing the quality of a test (Allen and Yen,
2001; DeVellis and Thorpe, 2021; Nunnally and Bernstein, 1978; Garcia
et al., 2020). Reliability refers to a test’s ability to provide consistent
results across different administrations or in various contexts, assuming
that the measured attribute remains unchanged (Cronbach, 1947). On
the other hand, validity concerns how accurately a test measures what it
intends to measure (Hughes, 2018). In Schimmack’s words “Without
valid measures even replicable results are uninformative” (Schimmack,
2021).
A trustable test must not only yield consistent results (reliability) but
must also be targeted and relevant to the construct it aims to assess
(Cunningham, 1986; Cook and Beckman, 2006).
As psychological characteristics are generally unobservable, the first
and still prevailing definition of validity is the degree to which a test
measures what it claims to measure (Garrett, 1937; Smith and Wright,
1928). Debates regarding the concept of validity have led to a multidi­
mensional view, which includes searching for evidence that the test is
consistent with the theory it is based on, provides information aligned
with the intended purposes, and that its results do not lead to negative
and unintended consequences for individuals, groups, or society (Furr,
2021). Today, in summary, empirical evidence of validity is based on the
test content, relationships with other variables, internal structure,
response processes, and the consequences of the test (Kline, 2013).
As we have hinted at before, the first step in test development is to
define what is being measured, as the construct definition directly im­
pacts the interpretation and use of the score: this concerns content
validity, on which there is a growing interest in psychometric research
(Spoto et al., 2023; El-Den et al., 2020).
Content validity of the test can be defined according to four general
areas (Sireci, 1998):

In recent years, the advancement in artificial intelligence models has
prompted exploration of their potential applications in psychometrics,
resulting in the integration of artificial neural networks for tasks such as
the selection of variables for psychopathological models (Dolce et al.,
2020), reducing dataset dimensionality and the development of short­
ened test versions using psychometric data (Casella et al., 2024). These
new techniques complement traditional methods such as PCA -Principal
Component Analysis (Hotelling, 1933) and factor analysis (Bartholo­
mew, 1995), which are widely used to simplify the complexity of psy­
chometric data, allowing psychometricians to identify relationships
between variables and identify latent factors determining test results
(Milano et al. 2024).
As stated begore, within AI methods and technologies, the rapidly
advancing domain of natural language processing , the advent of LLMs
(Chang et al., 2023), and the use of text embeddings (Morris et al., 2023)
can be particularly fit to open new frontiers in evaluating content
validity.
These models with their ability to understand and generate human
language on a large scale, offer an innovative method to examine and
enhance the coherence and relevance of psychometric test items.
Consequently, this allows for an advanced level of analysis where the
semantic and contextual similarities between different text segments can
be precisely measured. The effectiveness of sentence embeddings from
transformer models extends across various natural language processing
tasks. These tasks include text summarization, sentiment analysis,
question answering, and translation, demonstrating their predictive
prowess across a range of applications (Lewis et al., 2020; Radford et al.,
2019; Yang et al., 2019).

(1) Construct definition, which refers to the adequacy of how what is
intended to be tested is described and specified;
(2) Content relevance, which refers to the relevance of each test
element (item) to the tested construct. In other words, a content
relevance analysis focuses on the degree to which each item
appropriately measures the aspects of the construct it intends to
measure;
(3) Construct representation, which investigates the extent to which
the test items fully represent the intended construct and do not
contain material irrelevant to the construct being measured.
Items not judged relevant are removed, and new items are added
if experts believe some aspects of the construct are underrepre­
sented. The evaluation of construct representation also includes

1.2. Relation to the state of the art and scientific contribution
As expected, the field of language-based psychological assessment
has seen a wide application of Large Language Models. Despite the short
time period, many works have already been proposed (Kjell et al., 2022;
Hitsuwari et al., 2024; Abdurahman et al., 2023; Evans et al., 2022;
Nilsson et al., 2024). These works demonstrated that LLM-based em­
beddings outperform previous methods, such as bag-of-words embed­
dings, in predicting human responses to personality items (Abdurahman
et al., 2023). Furthermore, pre-trained LLMs on very large datasets
require no fine-tuning, preprocessing, or data preparation, and they
enable the clustering of similar items under the same latent factors
2

N. Milano et al.

Current Research in Behavioral Sciences 8 (2025) 100168

(Nilsson et al., 2024). Kjell et al. (2022) show how psychological as­
sessments of perceived well-being from text responses can be enhanced
by LLMs. The authors built a classification model that takes embedded
text as input and strongly correlates with standard psychological test
rating scales measuring subjective well-being. A similar approach is also
used by Hitsuwari et al. (2024), they predicted attitude towards ambi­
guity using only embeddings from free response to open-endend ques­
tions, obtaining promiseful results. This new conception of
psychological assessment has led researchers to hypothesize that
assessment can go beyond the classical Likert-based rating scales (Kjell
et al., 2023); classical tests could be replaced by open-ended questions or
colloquia analyzed by LLMs capable of understanding the nuances of
language. Contextual Embeddings from LLMs are also the methodology
used by Wulff and Mata (2023): they proposes embeddings to automate
the detection and resolution of conceptual redundancies (jingle-jangle
fallacies) across constructs in psychological measurement; furthermore,
they create a fine-tuned model explicitly tailored to analyze personality
test items and evaluate this embeddings against measures of internal
consistency, structural fidelity, and alignment between construct labels
and scale content. In another work they focus on the usability of open
language models for analysis in behavioral sciences, introducing this
methodology to the broader audience of the psychological community
(Hussain et al. 2024). Guenole et al. (2024)introduces Pseudo-Factor
Analysis (PFA), a novel psychometric method that predicts latent
factorial structures using cosine similarity matrices derived from lan­
guage embeddings of test items, bypassing the need for human response
data.
In our contribution, we explore how the contextual embeddings in
item textual analysis can provide a new lens through which assess the
validity of personality tests in psychometrics. Based on Rossiter (2008)
view of content validation, we developed an automatic procedure for the
analysis of the test’s items of several personality test. We retrieved
construct validity and predictive validity of a test outcome, and conse­
quently content validity, a-priori, based only on the semantics of the
items. We employs embeddings to conduct principal component analysis
(PCA) and compares semantic similarities with human responses, eval­
uating how well embeddings predict a-priori factorial structures of
personality tests compared to traditional human-response-based
methods.
Building on lexical hypothesis in psychology and leveraging em­
beddings generated by deep learning models to represent questionnaire
items in a multidimensional space, we aim to demonstrate how these
artificial intelligence models not only complement but can significantly
enhance traditional methodologies, offering a more robust and objective
approach to predicting and assessing test validity. We further evaluate
the practicality of our approach with the application to our method to
series of existing tests, including DASS-42 questionnaire (Depression
Anxiety Stress Scales, Lovibond and Lovibond (1995), BIG FIVE (Big
Five Personality Test, Goldberg, 1992), RIASEC questionnaire (Realistic,
Investigative, Artistic, Social, Enterprising, Conventional, Liao et al.,
2008,), and HSQ (Humor Styles Questionnaire, Martin et al., 2003).

questionnaire (N = 145828 participants), HSQ questionnaire (N = 1071
participants) and DASS questionnaire (N = 39775 participants). These
questionnaires had 50, 48, 32 and 42 items, respectively, and each
participant rated each item on a 5-point Likert scale. We selected these
four data sets, between the others in the Open Source Psychometrics
Project, as they are all multiconstruct Likert-scale questionnaires with at
least 1000 responses, covering diverse topics and involving diverse
constructs. The Open Psychometrics Project is a collection of widely
used scientific tests that are already validated and well-established in
the scientific literature. Participants can take these tests online in an
interactive format. The data collected is compiled and made freely
accessible for research purposes.The Big Five measures personality
within five major domains: Openness (O), Consciousness (C), Extraver­
sion (E), Neuroticism (N) and Agreeableness (A). The test used in the
experiments uses the Big-Five Factor Markers from the International
Personality Item Pool, developed by Goldberg (1992). The RIASEC
questionnaire describes personality through preferences and aversions
that influence the choice of work environments (and environments
through typical work activities and demands placed on individuals). The
questionnaire contains six personality dimensions (and parallel envi­
ronments): Realistic (R), Investigative (I), Artistic (A), Social (S),
Enterprising (E), and Conventional (C), collectively called RIASEC (Liao
et al., 2008). The HSQ describes personality through different styles of
using humor, containing the dimensions of Self-enhancing, Affiliative,
Aggressive, and Self-defeating (Martin et al., 2003). As such, the HSQ
uses a conceptualization of humor as a stable multidimensional aspect of
personality (Lopez and Snyder, 2003). Validation studies have further
shown that the HSQ dimensions (humor styles) correlate with other
established personality measures (Martin et al., 2003). Finally, The
DASS-42 (Lovibond and Lovibond, 1995) is a 42 item self-report scale
designed to measure the negative emotional states of depression(D),
anxiety(A) and stress(S). The principal value of the DASS in a clinical
setting is to clarify the locus of emotional disturbance, as part of the
broader task of clinical assessment. The essential function of the DASS is
to assess the severity of the core symptoms of depression, anxiety and
stress. As the scales of the DASS have been shown to have high internal
consistency and to yield meaningful discriminations in a variety of set­
tings (Clara et al., 2001)
2.2. Computational embedding models
In NLP, an embedding is a vectorized representation of a given input
word. Over the years, several techniques have been developed to pro­
duce increasingly informative embeddings. However, the challenge of
working with long sentences and accurately extrapolating the context of
words remains significant.
Most previous research that utilized embeddings to derive the se­
mantics of text has relied on Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA). LSA
(Dumais, 2004) is a technique that analyzes the relationships between a
set of documents and the terms they contain. It aims to capture the se­
mantics of words by reducing the dimensionality of textual data. LSA
begins by constructing a term-document matrix, where each row rep­
resents a unique term and each column represents a document. LSA
learns latent topics by performing singular value decomposition on the
term-document matrix. The resulting vectors represent terms and doc­
uments in a new, lower-dimensional space where similar terms and
documents are positioned closer together. This space aids in identifying
patterns and similarities in the data, facilitating document clustering.
LSA has been widely applied in psychological research, as mentioned in
the introduction. However, its primary limitation is the
single-word-based representation, which can be inadequate when
dealing with sentences that require the extraction of long-range context
(Abdurahman et al., 2023; Kjell et al., 2023).
With the rise of transformer-based neural networks in NLP, also
known as Large Language Models (LLMs), embeddings have become
increasingly informative for sentence representation.

2. Methods
In this section we describe the tests used in our experiments and the
computational models used to generate the embeddings. We begin
resuming the datasets of personality questionnaire used in ouexperi­
ments and the models used to retrieve the item’s embedding, focusing on
how these methods are trained and generated. Finally, we talk about the
measures implied to assess semantic similarity between the items and
obtain the underlying factorial structure.
2.1. Datasets
We used data collected from the Open Source Psychometrics Project
for the Big Five questionnaire (N = 19719 participants), RIASEC
3

N. Milano et al.

Current Research in Behavioral Sciences 8 (2025) 100168

To briefly explain, LLMs process sentences by analyzing information
provided by the input and extrapolating context to generate an appro­
priate response. This process begins by linearly projecting a sequence of
integer representation (each word is associate to an integer, representing
the word index inside a dictionary) of text x into an embedding on the
first neural network hidden layer h0 . The transformers forward pass is
then followed by N layers, each containing a residual Multi-headed selfattention (MSA) and a multi-layer perceptron block (MLP). MSA allows
the model to consider the entire input sequence simultaneously and to
weigh the importance of different parts relative to each other. This
mechanism enables models to capture complex dependencies in the
data, irrespective of the distance between relevant parts in the sequence
(Vaswani et al., 2017). The final embedding layer hn is transformed by
the final linear projection followed by the softmax activation function
into a sequence of probability distributions y, giving the next word based
on the input x specifical request. Formally:
h0 = Ex

(1)

(
)
̂ n− 1 = MSAn hn− 1 + hn− 1 , n = 1, 2, …, N
h

(2)

n
n
hn = MLPn ( ̂
h )+̂
h , n = 1, 2, …, N

(3)

̂ = PhN , y = softmax( y
̂)
y

(4)

sentences Sentence-BERT; the second is Mistral, a general-purpose
causal language model trained for text generation a causal reasoning;
the third is CLIP a multi-modal model trained with text and images.
Sentence-BERT (SBERT) (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019), are a class
of BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers)
based models especially trained for extrapolating similarity between the
embeddings of sentences. BERT is NLP model that is designed to train
neural networks jointly conditioning on both left and right context in all
layers. In this way BERT models looks at the entire sequence of words,
capturing a broader understanding of language and context. BERT is
pretrained on a large corpus of text, English Wikipedia and the entire
google books dataset, and is trained to predict randomly masked words
in sentences and in next sentence prediction: if two sentences follow
each other. After pretraining BERT can be fine-tuned adding additional
output layers in order to accomplish other tasks. In the case of SBERT it
was specifically designed to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of
deriving semantically meaningful sentence embeddings. It utilizes Sia­
mese Neural Networks, an architecture designed to be trained
comparing pairs or triplet of sentences, optimizing the embeddings to
put semantically similar sentences closer in the embedding space and
dissimilar sentences apart. The base SBERT model has been improved in
the last years, several models have been proposed and a benchmark
table has been developed testing all the models on the basis of their
performance in extrapolating similarities between sentences ) (Reimers
and Gurevych, 2019) .In our experiments we use all-roBERTa-large
model, a fine-tuned model base on RoBERTa (Liu et al, 2019), specif­
ically designed for predict the similarities between two sentences. The
model is trained on 1.2 billion sentence pairs coming from 35 different
dataset of sentence spanning over a wide range of topics, see reference
for details on the training methods. Along with RoBERTa, in Section 3.5,
we tried different models fine-tuned on top of SBERT model. These
models vary in size and use different training methodology, we compare

In this work we are interested in retrieving embeddings from LLMs,
to this reason we end the forward process of the network before
generating the network response y, to retrieve the final embedded rep­
resentation of the input: hn . See Fig. 1 for a schematic representation of
the embedding’s generation.
Here we employ three transformer based neural networks: the first
specifically designed for extrapolating semantic similarity between

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the item embedding process. Panel (A): The item is passed as input to the language model. Each word is singularly vectorized in
the first layer (WordEmbedding), then the LLM apply the MSA relating each word the others and extrapolating the context of the sentence throughout all the layers
and giving the final embedding for each word. Finally the embeddings are averaged and a single embedding is produced for each item. Panel (B) shows a compact
representation of embedding space: ideally, if the model correctly find semantic similarity among item, we should find that item related to the same construct are
closer together than item related to different constructs. Panel (C) summarizes this process showing how all items of the questionnaire are transormed in equally sized
row vectors.
4

N. Milano et al.

Current Research in Behavioral Sciences 8 (2025) 100168

the performance in predicting the factorial structure of the personality
tests.
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) (Radford et al.,
2021) is a multi-modal model that learns visual concepts from natural
language descriptions. It tries to relate images to textual descriptions to
perform a wide variety of visual tasks without the need for task-specific
training data. CLIP is trained on a large dataset composed of images
paired with corresponding textual descriptions. The model is composed
of two main components, a visual and a textual encoder that transform
their respective inputs into embeddings in a shared multidimensional
space. During training CLIP uses contrastive learning. CLIP learns to
align the embeddings from the image encoder with the corresponding
embeddings from the text encoder. It does this by maximizing the sim­
ilarity between the correct pairs of image and text embeddings, while
minimizing the similarity between mismatched pairs. This kind of
approach differs from classical textual only embeddings retrieval. It tries
to incorporate information from images into a share embedding space,
so we tried embeddings derived from CLIP in contrast to other classical
methods. We include CLIP in our semantic analysis, even if it is a
multi-modal model, to test if the richness of CLIP embeddings derived
from their pretraining on 400+ million text-image pairs can generate
robust and meaningful representations, even when isolated from their
original multimodal (text-image) context.
Mistral 7B (Jiang et al, 2023) is an open-source large language model
trained for general language understanding and generation. It is spe­
cifically trained for advanced causal reasoning and question answering.
It has been proved to be more performant of much larger models despite
its size (Jiang et al, 2023). In contrast to the other two models, Mistral
does not produce directly an embedding of the input sentence, because it
is not directly trained for learning embedding representation but to
generate text. The embedded representation of the input sentence is an
emergent property of the large language models, that indirectly learns
similar embeddings for similar inputs, in order to better perform in
causal reasoning. Lange language models’ embeddings has already
proven very effective in reproducing human behavior in cognitive task
with a little fine-tuning (Binz and Schulz, 2023), here we use the em­
beddings without fine-tuning them to see if useful semantic represen­
tation spontaneously emerge. We chose Mistral 7B over other language
models because it demonstrates strong performance on classic bench­
marks despite its relatively small size. Moreover, its compact architec­
ture allows it to run efficiently on many personal computers without
requiring specialized hardware. To extrapolate the embeddings from
Mistral we took the last hidden layer before text generation and aver­
aged it for the whole sentence.

∑D
i=1 (xi − x)(yi − y)
√̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
r̂ = √̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
∑D
∑D
2
(x
− x)2
i=1
i=1 (y − y)

(6)

When the embedding means x, y are zero, cosine similarity and
Pearson’s r are equal. As showed by Zhelezniak et al. ( 2019), in many
natural language processing applications the two measures coincide
because the embedding returned by language models have mean very
close to zero. From our preliminary analysis on our embeddings this
superposition between the two measures remains, so we prefer to use the
cosine similarity coefficient as correlation measures and
sum-of-squares-and-cross-products matrix (SSCP) on which to perform
the principal component analysis for dimensionality reduction.
Our approach follows these steps: first, we calculate the embeddings
for each test. Then, we retrieve the Pearson correlation for each pair of
embedded items. Once we obtain the Pearson correlation matrix, we
apply Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to the matrix, selecting the
number of principal components based on the factors expected by the
theory underlying the test. By projecting the items into a lowdimensional space, we can observe how items are assigned to relevant
factors and verify their correct clustering by examining the item factor
loadings. Finally, we measured the correlation between the loadings
derived from the PCA on the embeddings’ correlation and the loadings
obtained from the PCA on the subject responses. For clarity of reading,
we don’t use all the models contemporary, we make all our analysis
using RoBERTa as base language model to prove our points, because it
already has been proved effective in previous psychological research
using items embedding (Abdurahman et al., 2023; Kjell et al., 2023).
Finally, in concluding paragraph we compare RoBERTa with the other
two language models.
3. Results
3.1. Correlation matrix of the embeddings
We retrieved the embeddings for each item of a test using them as
inputs of the LLMs. Each test comprises a different number of items, N;
the list of items serves as input for the Embedding model, which returns
an output of dimension (N,E), where E represents the dimension of the
embedding space. This dimension may vary among different models; for
instance, in the case of RoBERTa, E = 1024. The matrix returned from
the model represents the projection of the complete test into the model’s
embedding space, with each row of the matrix corresponding to the
embedding vector for a particular item of the test. Once the embeddings
are retrieved, we employ a preliminary approach to determine if simi­
larities exist among them in a large multidimensional space. We perform
a 2-Dimensional projection of the embedded items using T-SNE (Van der
Maaten and Hinton, 2008). The results for the Big Five questionnaire are
reported in Fig. 2.
From the figure, it is clear that even though we start from a very large
space of 1024 dimensions, items related to the same factor are mapped
closer together. As we can observe, the majority of items belonging to
the same construct are clustered together. For example, observe the
lower-left zone of the space where we can find neuroticism-related items
(blue points), or the middle left where there are conscientiousness items
(green points). Agreeableness and extraversion-related items appear to
be more scattered together, indicating a substantial overlap in mean­
ings. Moreover, some isolated items are mapped in different zones
compared to the majority of the items belonging to the same factor, such
as C8 and O9, likely reflecting ambiguous semantics that the language
model is not able to properly discriminate. Nevertheless, this pre­
liminary analysis gives us a hint that the language model embeddings
are effectively correlated and that useful information appears to be
contained in them.
After calculating the embedding for each item, we measure the se­
mantic similarity of each pair using the Cosine similarity coefficient,

2.3. Measures
To retrieve the underlying factor structure of the embeddings we
need to extrapolate the correlation between them. A common measure
in the literature related to embeddings semantic analysis is the cosine
similarity.
Cosine similarity is a measure used to determine how similar two
non-zero vectors are in an inner product space. This metric calculates the
cosine of the angle between the two vectors, providing an indication of
their orientation to each other, irrespective of their magnitude. Cosine
similarity is particularly used in positive space, where the outcome is
neatly bounded in [0, 1]. Formally:
∑D
i=1 xi yi
cos(x, y) = √̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
(5)
∑D 2 √̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
∑D 2
i=1 x
i=1 y
Where x and y are two embeddings vector in a D-dimensional
embedding space.
Eq. (1) is very similar to classic Pearson correlation coefficient,
formally:

5

N. Milano et al.

Current Research in Behavioral Sciences 8 (2025) 100168

belonging to the same construct, share the highest loading on the same
principal component. To be considered the highest, a loading must also
be greater than 0.4 (Stevens, 2002).
Ideally, in the case of the Big Five questionnaire, we aim to find that
items related to the extraversion construct have the highest loading on
the same principal component. The same expectation applies to items
related to neuroticism, and so on.
To achieve this, we measured the percentage of items correctly
assigned together on the same principal component and represented this
percentage on a radar plot, shown in Fig. 4.
From Fig. 4, it is evident that almost all constructs of all tests are
composed of the same items as predicted by theory. We can observe that
many constructs from different tests are correctly clustered together,
with a percentage exceeding 90%. On average, the correct semantic
similarity clustering found is above 70% in all four tests.
However, some constructs are more challenging to cluster, such as
agreeableness and stress. Here, we found the percentage of correctly
clustered items to be around 50%. This result is not surprising when we
consider, as shown in the table of loadings (S1), that many items related
to agreeableness have higher loadings on the same principal component
as those related to extraversion. These findings are common in realworld scenarios, where subjects’ responses often show a significant
correlation between these pairs of constructs (Côté and Moskowitz,
1998).

Fig. 2. T-SNE projection of the embeddings in a 2-dimensional space. Yellow
points are openness (O) related items, Green points are Conscientiousness (C)
items, Blue points are Neuroticism (N) items, Black points are extra-version (E)
items and violet points are Agreeableness (A) items.

3.3. Correlation with human response

obtaining a squared symmetrical matrix that represents the correlation
among all pairs of items, denoted as dimension (N,N). In Fig. 3, we
report the average correlation between items belonging to the same
construct and items belonging to different constructs for the embeddings
retrieved with the RoBERTa model. We observe that items belonging to
the same construct show the highest similarity across all the question­
naires tested. We conduct a Welch’s test to assess the significative dif­
ference of the means, the similarity of identical items is removed so we
have unequal sample size. We found that the average similiraty of two
constructs are significantly different (p-value < 0.001) . This implies
that, even when not explicitly trained with psychological items, the
language model has the capacity to capture similar meanings in test’s
structure, based on the vector embeddings of items.
To further analyze how the factors underlying the items are
composed, we perform a PCA analysis starting from the correlation
matrix of the embeddings for all tests.

Until now, we have demonstrated how embedding models based on
large language models can accurately identify semantic similarities
among items. Moreover, the PCA, starting from the correlation between
embeddings, defines a latent space that correctly aligns items related to
the same construct with the same principal component, ensuring the
interpretability of the results and uncovering the theoretically hypoth­
esized structure. Here, we aim to determine if the latent structure
identified from the semantic similarity analysis matches the latent
structure derived from human subjects’ actual responses. Specifically,
we are interested in analyzing whether the loadings obtained from the
embedded item representations are comparable to those derived from
the subjects’ responses. By measuring the correlation between the
loadings in these two cases, we can gain insight into how well the se­
mantics of the items predict the subjects’ responses. Ideally, a high
correlation between the loadings of a construct indicates not only that
the related items are correctly grouped together but also that the crossloadings and the loadings of other factors follow similar patterns.
To achieve this, we collected human data from the open psycho­
metrics website for all four tests. Then, we applied the same procedure
described above for the embeddings to the matrix of responses: first, we
calculated the Pearson correlation for each pair of items, then we
applied PCA on the correlation matrix using the number of latent factors
predicted by the theory, finally retrieving the items’ loadings. In the case
of tests that include reverse-scored items, we first rescaled the items to
the correct range. This operation is necessary because the embedding
model does not differentiate between reversed and not-reversed items.
Thus, to ensure a proper comparison between loadings, we rescale the
responses in the case of reversed items. Tables 5–8 shows the Spearman
correlation factors for the loadings of all the four-test examined along all
constructs.
The tables show the Spearman correlation factor for the four exam­
ined test. Here we used the Spearman Correlation because the loadings
are not normally distributed. As we can see we found high correlation
between the loadings of the embeddings and the loadings of the response
on the same constructs for all the tests (R > 0.5, p-value<<0.001). These
findings support what we have already found in the previous principal
component analysis, and show how semantic similarity between items
captures the relation among factor that we retrieve in human responses.
To reinforce these results, we calculated Omega (McDonald, 1999) to

3.2. PCA analysis
Performing a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) helps us under­
stand how different items are clustered together and whether items
belonging to the same construct are correctly identified. Moreover, we
can retrieve the loadings related to each principal component to deter­
mine how significantly an item contributes to a principal component.
Additionally, in the case of cross-loadings, we can identify other con­
structs to which an item is incorrectly assigned.
For the number of principal components, we used the number of
dimensions hypothesized by the theory; for example, 5 for the Big Five
personality traits questionnaire, 6 for the RIASEC model, 3 for the DSA,
and 4 for the HSQ. We employed varimax as the method for orthogonal
rotation. Tables 1–4 present the eigenvalues, the proportion of variance
explained, and the cumulative variance for each test, showcasing results
obtained with the best embedding model.
The cumulative variance explained by the PCA applied to the em­
beddings is higher than that explained by human responses across all
four tests. This suggest that the embeddings alone can effectively cap­
ture the underlying factors described by the theory. Next, we identified
the loadings of each item to ascertain whether the items are correctly
assigned to their underlying constructs. We calculated the highest
loadings for each item and determined how many items, theoretically
6

Current Research in Behavioral Sciences 8 (2025) 100168

N. Milano et al.

Fig. 3. Average Cosine similarity matrix across constructs for the four questionnaires. Upper left figure shows the Big 5 average correlation, Upper right Riasec, lower
left HSQ and lower right the DASS questionnaire. Items belonging to the same construct shows higher correlation respect to cross-constructs correlation.
Table 1
Eigenvalues, variance explained by each component and cumulative variance
relative to the Big 5 Test.

Table 3
Eigenvalues, variance explained by each component and cumulative variance
relative to the DSA Test.

Big 5
Eigenvalues
Variance explained
Cumulative variance

DSA
PC 1

PC 2

PC 3

PC 4

PC 5

6.46
0.13
0.13

5.57
0.11
0.24

4.90
0.10
0.34

4.50
0.09
0.43

3.77
0.08
0.51

Eigenvalues
Variance explained
Cumulative variance

Table 2
Eigenvalues, variance explained by each component and cumulative variance
relative to the RIASEC Test.

PC 2

PC 3

8.36
0.20
0.20

8.16
0.19
0.39

8.01
0.19
0.58

Table 4
Eigenvalues, variance explained by each component and cumulative variance
relative to the HSQ Test.

RIASEC
Eigenvalues
Variance explained
Cumulative variance

PC 1

HSQ
PC 1

PC 2

PC 3

PC 4

PC 5

PC 6

4.46
0.09
0.09

4.38
0.09
0.18

3.27
0.07
0.25

3.20
0.07
0.32

3.07
0.06
0.38

2.71
0.06
0.44

Eigenvalues
Variance explained
Cumulative variance

7

PC 1

PC 2

PC 3

PC 4

6.21
0.19
0.19

5.89
0.18
0.37

5.86
0.18
0.56

4.12
0.13
0.68

N. Milano et al.

Current Research in Behavioral Sciences 8 (2025) 100168

Fig. 4. Radar plot of the percentage of items belonging to the same construct correctly assigned to the same principal component. Upper left figure shows the Big 5
average correlation, Upper right Riasec, lower left HSQ and lower right the DASS questionnaire.
Table 5
Spearman R correlation between the loading retrieved from the PCA on the embeddings and the loadings obtained from the PCA on human’s response to the Big Five
test along with confidence interval (Z Fisher-Transformed 95% CI, N-samples 100 ). The asterisk indicates significant p-value ( < 0.001).
Embeddings/humans

Extraversion

Neuroticism

Agreeableness

Coscientiousness

Openess

Extraversion

0.57
[0.34, 0.73] *
0.15
[-0.13, 0.41]

0.03
[-0.25, 0.30]
0.10
[-0.18, 0.37]

-0.14
[-0.40, 0.14]
-0.10
[-0.37, 0.18]

-0.13
[-0.39, 0.15]
-0.25
[-0.53, -0.01]

-0.34
[-0.56, -0.07]

-0.25
[-0.49, 0.03]

0.60
[0.39, 0.75]
*
0.16
[-0.12, 0.42]

-0.25
[-0.49, 0.03]

Agreeableness

0.38
[0.11, 0.60]

-0.17
[-0.42, 0.11]
0.40
[0.14, 0.61]
*
-0.11
[-0.38, 0.17]

Coscientiousness

-0.24
[-0.49, 0.04]

0.02
[-0.26, 0.30]

0.65
[0.45, 0.79]
*
-0.22
[-0.47, 0.06]

Openess

-0.35
[-0.57,-0.08]

-0.12
[-0.39, 0.16]

-0.17
[-0.43, 0.11]

Neuroticism

assess how well the items express the underlying construct in cases of
human responses and embedded representations. Omega is formally
defined as follows:

( ∑ )2
λi
∑
+ i ui
i λi

ω = ( ∑ )2i

0.64
[0.44, 0.78]
*

(7)

Where λi are the item’s loadings related to a given factor i and ui their
8

N. Milano et al.

Current Research in Behavioral Sciences 8 (2025) 100168

Table 6
Spearman R correlation between the loading retrieved from the PCA on the embeddings and the loadings obtained from the PCA on human’s response to the RIASEC
test along with confidence interval (Z Fisher-Transformed 95% CI, , N-samples 64). The asterisk indicates significant p-value (p-value < 0.001).
Embeddings/humans

Realistic

Investigative

Artistic

Social

Enterprising

Conventional

Realistic

0.54
[0.30, 0.71]
*
-0.14
[-0.41, 0.15]

-0.21
[-0.47, 0.08]

-0.14
[-0.41, 0.15]

-0.18
[-0.44, 0.11]

0.14
[-0.15, 0.41]

0.25
[-0.04, 0.50]

0.28
[-0.00, 0.52]

0.00
[-0.28, 0.28]

-0.27
[-0.51, 0.02]

-0.38
[-0.64, -0.04]

0.19
[-0.10, 0.45]

-0.08
[-0.36, 0.21]

-0.30
[-0.54, -0.02]

-0.06
[-0.34, 0.23]

-0.21
[-0.47, 0.08]

0.62
[0.41, 0.77]
*
0.23
[-0.06, 0.48]

0.11
[-0.18, 0.38]

Investigative
Artistic

-0.31
[-0.55, -0.03]

0.45
[0.19, 0.65]
*
0.03
[-0.26, 0.31]

Social

-0.26
[-0.51, 0.03]

-0.11
[-0.38, 0.18]

0.60
[0.38, 0.76]
*
0.10
[-0.19, 0.37]

Enterprising

-0.10
[-0.37, 0.19]

-0.29
[-0.53, -0.01]

-0.03
[-0.31, 0.26]

0.57
[0.34, 0.74]
*
-0.05
[-0.33, 0.24]

Conventional

0.21
[-0.08, 0.47]

-0.13
[-0.40, 0.16]

-0.28
[-0.52, 0.00

-0.30
[-0.54, -0.02]

variance. Results are reported in Tables 9–12 for all the tests examined.
The ω values that we measured are nearly identical for each construct
of each test. However, we found a substantial mismatch in the case of
Agreeableness and Aggressive Humor, which also yielded weaker results
in the previous analysis compared to the percentage of correctly iden­
tified items for other constructs.
In the next section we use other approaches to get the embeddings of
our items, to see what the best performing method in the context of a
content validity analysis is.

Table 7
Spearman R correlation between the loading retrieved from the PCA on the
embeddings and the loadings obtained from the PCA on human’s response to the
HSQ test along with confidence interval (Z Fisher-Transformed 95% CI, Nsamples 96). The asterisk indicates significant p-value (p-value < 0.001).
Embeddings/
humans

Affiliative
humor

S-E humor

Aggressive
humor

S-D
humor

Affiliative humor

0.50
[0.18, 0.72]
*
0.17
[-0.19, 0.49]

-0.10
[-0.43,
0.26]
0.64
[0.37,
0.81]
*
-0.36
[-0.63,
-0.01]
-0.08
[-0.42,
0.28]

-0.06
[-0.40, 0.29]

-0.26
[-0.56,
0.10]
-0.16
[-0.48,
0.20]

S-E humor

Aggressive humor

-0.38
[-0.64, -0.04]

S-D humor

-0.03
[-0.37, 0.32]

-0.34
[-0.62, 0.01]
0.45
[0.12, 0.69]
*
-0.14
[-0.47, 0.22]

3.4. Different embeddings models
We have observed how a BERT-based model, explicitly designed and
evaluated for its quality in sentence embedding, provides a robust rep­
resentation of the latent structure of different tests’ items. In this sub­
section, we explore embeddings generated by various models explicitly
trained to produce meaningful representations for analyzing semantic
relationships in text. These models differ in their training methodologies
and sizes. RoBERTa, a general-purpose model designed for versatility
across multiple use cases (Liu et al., 2019), serves as a baseline in our
comparisons. In addition, we examined models such as GTR-T5-XXL (Ni
et al., 2021a), optimized for semantic search tasks, and Sentence-T5-XXL
(Ni et al., 2021b), specifically trained for sentence similarity analysis.
We also included MPNet-Base-v2 (Song et al., 2020), another
general-purpose model with enhanced contextual understanding. For
further details on the training procedures and objectives of these models,
we recommend consulting the original publications.
Furthermore, along with models explicitly trained to analyze se­
mantic relationship from text sources, we used also CLIP and MistralAI.
CLIP is a multimodal model capable of processing texts and images by
embedding them into a joint vector space. MistralAI, on the other hand,
is a general-purpose causal large language model. It is not specifically
designed for sentence similarity, and its embeddings are extracted from
the last layer of the transformer network.

0.10
[-0.26,
0.43]
0.56
[0.26,
0.76]
*

Table 8
Spearman R correlation between the loading retrieved from the PCA on the
embeddings and the loadings obtained from the PCA on human’s response to the
DASS test along with confidence interval (Z Fisher-Transformed 95% CI, Nsamples 72). The asterisk indicates significant p-value (p-value < 0.001).
Embeddings/humans

Depression

Anxiety

Stress

Depression

0.90
[0.80, 0.95]
-0.34
[-0.62, 0.01]
-0.37
[-0.64, -0.02]

-0.32
[-0.60, 0.03]
0.81
[0.64, 0.90]
-0.04
[-0.38, 0.31]

-0.28
[-0.57, 0.08]
-0.08
[-0.42, 0.28]
0.80
[0.63, 0.90]

Anxiety
Stress

Table 10
Omega result for each construct of the RIASEC test measured from the subject’s
response and from the embedded representation.

Table 9
Omega result for each construct of the Big Five test measured from the subject’s
response and from the embedded representation.
Big 5 constructs

Human subjects ω

Embedded representation ω

Extra-version
Neuroticism
Agreeableness
Neuroticism
Openess

0.91
0.89
0.87
0.85
0.85

0.87
0.89
0.77
0.84
0.85

0.72
[0.55, 0.83]
*

9

RIASEC constructs

Human subjects ω

Embedded representation ω

Realistic
Investigative
Artistic
Social
Enterprising
Conventional

0.89
0.91
0.88
0.88
0.85
0.91

0.81
0.88
0.80
0.81
0.87
0.80

N. Milano et al.

Current Research in Behavioral Sciences 8 (2025) 100168

validation, ensures the selection of appropriate items to measure
intended constructs without requiring supervision. The results emerge
as a process of clustering, as in our case. We believe that validation and
reliability processes are still necessary in psychological assessment, and
LLMs offer an insightful way to support this process.
Our study advances the field by integrating contemporary artificial
intelligence technologies—specifically large language models (LLMs)
and text embeddings—to enhance the content validity analysis of per­
sonality tests. This integration provides a novel lens through which
examine and refine test items.
In this work we have proposed a method to support the validation
process, by focusing on the semantics of items and applying artificial
intelligence methods that provides very useful hints on items charac­
teristics and factorial structure even before test administration. This can
allow to analyze, select and refine items also before a trial, introducing a
new “ex ante” step in test validation. This sheds further light on items
and test psychometrics characteristic and enhances more accurate esti­
mation of them by researchers involved in item formulation and test
validation.
We have demonstrated that the application of LLMs, in conjunction
with sentence embeddings, can effectively capture the semantic nuances
of test items. This capability allows for a more precise assessment of
content validity before the practical application of the test. By analyzing
the relationships between test items through the semantic similarity
extracted by these models, we have been able to identify underlying
factor structures that are in alignment with the theoretical constructs
they intend to measure. This alignment underscores the potential of
LLMs to not only support but also potentially enhance the methodo­
logical framework for psychometric test development and validation.
Our findings indicate that LLMs can discriminate subtle linguistic
patterns that may not be immediately apparent. For instance, the se­
mantic clustering of items associated with similar traits suggests that
these models can detect congruence and discrepancies within test con­
tent effectively. This ability enhances the precision of test construction
by ensuring that items are both representative and relevant to the con­
structs being measured, thereby improving the overall quality and
applicability of psychometric assessments.
Moreover, the practical applications of this research extend beyond
the academic realm into clinical and organizational settings where
psychometric tests are frequently employed. By enhancing the content
validity of these tests, practitioners can make more informed decisions
based on results that more accurately reflect the true characteristics and
abilities of individuals. Anyway, our results are based on already vali­
dated tests that have undergone a statistical process dedicated to
removing items not aligned with the theoretical structure (Rossiter,
2002). It would be interesting to see if our findings remain valid with
newly proposed, unvalidated items. This is a limitation of our study, and
in future work, we will try to integrate the LLMs embedding into the test
construction process to see if the prediction of respondents’ factorial
structure still holds. Another intriguing open question not addressed in
our work is the nature of the errors made by the language model when
misclassifying items. Analyzing these errors could provide valuable in­
sights into which items pose greater challenges for the language model
and, conversely, which items the model handles with ease but appear
ambiguous to humans. Such an analysis could contribute to a deeper
understanding of the similarities and differences between human and
artificial intelligence capabilities. Furthermore, our analysis was spe­
cifically restricted to the personality domain. Future research should
explore whether these findings generalize to psychometric tests assess­
ing other psychological attributes, such as cognitive abilities, memory,
technical aptitudes, and more. Additionally, future studies could
investigate the potential of using multi-modal transformers model em­
beddings to analyze non-verbal test environments, further enhancing
the application domain in psychometrics of modern artificial intelli­
gence models.
Our work also corroborates previous studies where similar results are

Table 11
Omega result for each construct of the HSQ test measured from the subject’s
response and from the embedded representation.
HSQ constructs

Human subjects ω

Embedded representation ω

Affiliative humor
Self-enhancing humor
Aggressive humor
Self-Defeating humor

0.86
0.84
0.84
0.86

0.84
0.87
0.74
0.85

Table 12
Omega result for each construct of the DASS test measured from the subject’s
response and from the embedded representation.
DASS constructs

Human subjects ω

Embedded representation ω

Depression
Stress
Anxiety

0.95
0.90
0.91

0.94
0.92
0.93

The methodology employed is identical to that described for the
RoBERTa model: we retrieve the embeddings, calculate the correlations
among them, and perform a principal component analysis. As a per­
formance measure among the models, we used the average percentage
of correctly aligned items belonging to the same constructs for each test.
Fig. 5 displays a bar chart showing the average number of correctly
grouped items, along with the standard deviation for each test. As can be
seen, the roBERTa and MPNET models performs equally good in all tests
(we conducted a Student t-test for the comparison of means finding a pvalue >0.05 in all tests, sample size depends from the factors of the test).
The sentence-T5 model reaches the performance of RoBERTa in all tests
(Student t-test p-value >0.05) with the only exception of the Big 5
(Student t-test p-value < 0.01). The GT-T5 perform worse than RoBERTa
in all tests (Student t-test p-value < 0.01) except that in the Big 5
questionnaire (Student t-test p-value > 0.05). Finally, Mistral and CLIP
fail to reach RoBERTa performance in all tests (Student t-test p-value <
0.01). Examining the loadings of these two models, we note that the
loadings do not appear to be related to a single principal component, and
it is not possible to clearly identify a principal axis grouping items
related to the same constructs. This is not surprising, as these models are
not specifically trained for semantic tasks. In contrast, MPNET and
RoBERTa outperform larger models like GT-T5 and sentence-T5, despite
being significantly smaller (<1GB of model size compared to ~10GB)
and trained on smaller corpora. These findings suggest that in this
domain, a tailored approach—specifically focused on using words and
phrases from personality research—could improve the performance of
language models fine-tuned for analyzing personality items. Recent
studies have already shown promising results in this direction (Wulff
and Mata, 2023; Hommel and Arslan, 2024).
4. Conclusions
The use of psychometric test in research, diagnosis, assessment and
evaluation, considering the impact it may have on individuals, requires
to rely on trustable, robust, reliable and valid tools. Respecting this
imperative requires, of course, a notable effort and a strict respect of
procedures.
At the same time, it stimulated the quest for newer and newer pro­
cedures that lead to more and more robust, reliable and valid tests.
Novel approaches based on LLMs for psychological assessment have
shown that these models are powerful enough to achieve test perfor­
mance based solely on respondents’ answers to open questions or by
analyzing the natural speech of patients (Kjell et al., 2022; Hitsuwari
et al., 2024; Abdurahman et al., 2023; Nilsson et al., 2024; Kjell et al.,
2023). These approaches are promising, but participants’ responses still
need expert supervision to be analyzed by a machine learning algorithm.
In contrast, classical test platform, through the process of content
10

N. Milano et al.

Current Research in Behavioral Sciences 8 (2025) 100168

Fig. 5. Bar chart, with error bars reporting standard deviation from the mean, showing the performance of roBERTa, GT-T5, Sentence-T5, MPNET, Mistral and CLIP
on the four examined questionnaire. For each questionnaire the performance is calculated averaging the percentage of item belonging to the same construct correctly
assigned to the same principal component. Upper left figure shows the Big 5 average correlation, Upper right Riasec, lower left HSQ and lower right the DASS
questionnaire.

implicitly addressed (Wulff and Mata, 2023; Abdurahman et al., 2023;
Kjell et al., 2022; Nilsson et al., 2024). We explicitly highlight how the
factorial structure observed in humans emerges from the semantics of
test items. This finding is essential for predicting human responses to
items, assessing structural fidelity and alignment between constructs
and scale content, and, more broadly, leveraging these results within the
context of content validity.
It is important to note that our best performing large language
models (LLMs), RoBERTa and MPNET, are specifically trained to iden­
tify semantic similarities in sentences. Anyway, this models are trained

using general-purpose sentences that span many different fields. None­
theless, the vast variety of sentences to which they are exposed is suf­
ficient to ensure a proper semantic understanding of psychological
items. Furthermore, from a purely generalist semantic understanding of
the text, we retrieve the same underlying factor structure that we assume
to be at the basis of human behavior. This could be seen as a further
proof of the deep entanglement between language and behavior,
proving that models that exploit key property of language could be very
useful in the context of behavioral science. We also found that model
complexity is not directly correlated with performance in this domain.
11

N. Milano et al.

Current Research in Behavioral Sciences 8 (2025) 100168

More complex and larger models, such as GT-T5 and Sentence-T5,
perform at least as well as smaller models like RoBERTa and MPNET,
but more often underperform. Notably, the smaller models, which are an
order of magnitude smaller in size (measured in megabytes), frequently
yield comparable or better results. These findings suggest that a
thoughtful training approach, explicitly tailored for personality
research, could further enhance performance. This conclusion is sup­
ported by recent studies (Wulff and Mata, 2023; Hommel and Arslan,
2024). Furthermore, models such as Mistral and CLIP unsurprisingly fail
to accurately identify similarities among items. For Mistral, this is likely
because its training focuses on general language understanding and text
generation rather than on semantic analysis. The embeddings it pro­
duces are not immediately suited for classification tasks based on se­
mantic analysis of text. However, a recent work (Binz and Schulz, 2023)
has demonstrated how simple fine-tuning of the general LLM embed­
dings on classic language-based cognitive tasks can replicate human
behavior. These findings suggest that embeddings from general-purpose
language models may also contain useful information if they are care­
fully fine-tuned for specific tasks. The problem with CLIP-based models
may lie in the fact that they integrate images and text. When dealing
with psychological items, we often encounter abstract concepts that are
typically not present in images, which are more related to concrete
objects. This results in embeddings that are not aligned with our task,
leading to poor outcomes when we perform dimensionality reduction
analysis.
The quality and breadth of training data for these models can affect
their ability to generalize across different types of psychological items.
We have observed that a generalist model, specifically trained to classify
semantic similarities in sentences, conceals the same latent structure
found in human subjects. It would be interesting to explore the creation
of a model specifically trained on a large dataset of psychological items
in future works. Such a model could perform as an expert validator and
serve as a useful tool for preliminary content validation.
Future research should therefore focus on refining these models to
handle a broader array of test types and constructs, ensuring their
applicability across diverse psychometric scenarios. Continued ad­
vancements in NLP and machine learning could further enhance the
accuracy and efficiency of semantic analyses, potentially leading to
more robust methodologies for psychometric validation. Additionally,
comparative studies involving traditional and AI-enhanced methods
would be invaluable in quantifying the improvements in validity and
reliability contributed by these technologies. In conclusion, the inte­
gration of large language models and text embeddings into the field of
psychometry represents a promising frontier for enhancing the scientific
rigor and practical utility of psychometric tests. By leveraging the power
of AI to scrutinize and refine test items, this research contributes to the
ongoing evolution of psychometric testing—making it a more precise
tool for understanding human psychology and behavior.

References
Abdurahman, S., Vu, H., Zou, W., Ungar, L., Bhatia, S., 2023. A deep learning approach
to personality assessment: generalizing across items and expanding the reach of
survey-based research. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol.
Allen, M.J., Yen, W.M., 2001. Introduction to Measurement Theory. Waveland Press.
Allport, G.W., Odbert, H.G., 1936. Trait names: A psycholexical study. Psychol. Monogr.
47 (1), i–171. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0093360.
Arnulf, J.K., Larsen, K.R., Martinsen, Ø.L., Bong, C.H., 2014. Predicting survey responses:
how and why semantics shape survey statistics on organizational behaviour. PLoS
One 9 (9). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0106361. Article e106361.
Arnulf, J.K., Larsen, K.R., Martinsen, Ø.L., Nimon, K.F., 2021. Semantic algorithms in the
assessment of attitudes and personality. Front. Psychol. 12, 720559.
Arnulf, J.K., Larsen, K.R., 2020. Culture blind leadership research: how semantically
determined survey data may fail to detect cultural differences. Front. Psychol. 11,
487924.
Binz, M., & Schulz, E. (2023). Turning large language models into cognitive models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03917.
Cattell, R.B., 1943. The description of personality I. Foundations of trait measurement.
Psychol. Rev. 50 (6), 559–594. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0057276.
Chang, Y., Wang, X., Wang, J., Wu, Y., Yang, L., Zhu, K., Xie, X., 2023. A survey on
evaluation of large language models. ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol.
Clara, I.P., Cox, B.J., Enns, M.W., 2001. Confirmatory factor analysis of the
depression–anxiety–stress scales in depressed and anxious patients. J. Psychopathol.
Behav. Assess. 23, 61–67.
Cook, D.A., Beckman, T.J., 2006. Current concepts in validity and reliability for
psychometric instruments: theory and application. Am. J. Med. 119 (2), 166–1e7.
Côté, S., Moskowitz, D.S., 1998. On the dynamic covariation between interpersonal
behavior and affect: prediction from neuroticism, extraversion, and agreeableness.
J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 75 (4), 1032.
Crocker, L.M., Miller, M.D., Franks, E.A., 1989. Quantitative methods for assessing the fit
between test and curriculum. Appl. Meas. Educ. 2 (2), 179–194. https://doi.org/
10.1207/s15324818ame0202_6.
Cronbach, L.J., 1947. Test “reliability”: its meaning and determination. Psychometrika
12 (1), 1–16.
Cunningham, W. R. (1986). Psychometric perspectives: validity and reliability.
DeVellis, R.F., Thorpe, C.T., 2021. Scale Development: Theory and Applications. Sage
publications.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K., 2019. BERT: pretraining of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In: Burstein, J., Doran, C.,
Solorio, T. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies(Long and Short Papers Vol. 1. Association for Computational
Linguistics, pp. 4171–4186. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/N19-1423.
Dumais, S.T., 2004. Latent semantic analysis. Annu. Rev. Inf. Sci. Technol. (ARIST) 38,
189–230.
El-Den, S., Schneider, C., Mirzaei, A., Carter, S., 2020. How to measure a latent construct:
psychometric principles for the development and validation of measurement
instruments. Int. J. Pharm. Pract. 28 (4), 326–336.
Evans, A.M., Rosenbusch, H., Zeelenberg, M., 2022. Using semantic similarity to
understand the psychological constructs related to prosociality. Curr. Opin. Psychol.
44, 226–230. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsy.2021.09.019.
Furr, R.M., 2021. Psychometrics: An Introduction. SAGE Publications.
Galton, F., 1884. Measurement of character. Fortn. Rev. 36, 179–185. https://galton.or
g/essays/1880-1889/galton-1884-fort-rev-measurement-character.pdf.
Garcia, D., Rosenberg, P., Nima, A.A., Granjard, A., Cloninger, K.M., Sikström, S., 2020.
Validation of two short personality inventories using self-descriptions in natural
language and quantitative semantics test theory. Front. Psychol. 11. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00016. Article 16.
Garrett, H.E., 1937. Statistics in Psychology and Education, 2nd ed. Longmans, Green,
p. 493.
Gefen, D., Larsen, K.R., 2017. Controlling for lexical closeness in survey research: a
demonstration on the technology acceptance model. J. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 18 (10), 1.
Goldberg, L.R., 1992. The development of markers for the Big-five factor structure.
Psychol. Assess. 4 (1), 26.
Hitsuwari, J., Okano, H., Nomura, M., 2024. Predicting attitudes toward ambiguity using
natural language processing on free descriptions for open-ended question
measurements. Sci. Rep. 14 (1), 8276.
Hommel, B. E., & Arslan, R. C. (2024, April). Language models accurately infer
correlations between psychological items and scales from text alone.
Hughes, D. J. (2018). Psychometric validity: establishing the accuracy and
appropriateness of psychometric measures. The Wiley handbook of psychometric
testing: A multidisciplinary reference on survey, scale and test development, 751779.
Hussain, Z., Binz, M., Mata, R., Wulff, D.U., 2024. A tutorial on open-source large
language models for behavioral science. Behav. Res. Methods 56 (8), 8214–8237.
Jiang, A. Q., Sablayrolles, A., Mensch, A., Bamford, C., Chaplot, D. S., Casas, D. D. L., &
Sayed, W. E. (2023). Mistral 7B. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825.
Kjell, O.N., Kjell, K., Schwartz, H.A., 2023. Beyond rating scales: with targeted
evaluation, language models are poised for psychological assessment. Psychiatry
Res., 115667
Kjell, O.N., Sikström, S., Kjell, K., Schwartz, H.A., 2022. Natural language analyzed with
AI-based transformers predict traditional subjective well-being measures
approaching the theoretical upper limits in accuracy. Sci. Rep. 12 (1), 3918.
Kline, P., 2013. Handbook of Psychological Testing. Routledge.

Funding
We received financial support from the Italian PNRR MUR project
with the identifier PE0000013-FAIR. The funder had no role in study
design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation
of the manuscript.
Data availability statement
The data are publicly available at the link https://openpsychome
trics.org/_rawdata/.
The code will be available upon request.
Declaration of competing interest
None.
12

N. Milano et al.

Current Research in Behavioral Sciences 8 (2025) 100168

Liao, H.Y., Armstrong, P.I., Rounds, J., 2008. Development and initial validation of
public domain Basic Interest markers. J. Vocat. Behav. 73 (1), 159–183.
Liu, Y., Ott, M., Goyal, N., Du, J., Joshi, M., Chen, D., Levy, O., Lewis, M., Zettlemoyer,
L., & Stoyanov, V. (2019). RoBERTa: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining
approach. arXiv:1907.11692.
Lovibond, P.F., Lovibond, S.H., 1995. The structure of negative emotional states:
comparison of the depression anxiety stress scales (DASS) with the Beck depression
and anxiety inventories. Behav. Res. Ther. 33 (3), 335–343.
Martin, R.A., Puhlik-Doris, P., Larsen, G., Gray, J., Weir, K., 2003. Individual differences
in uses of humor and their relation to psychological well-being: development of the
humor styles questionnaire. J. Res. Pers. 37 (1), 48–75.
Martone, A., Sireci, S.G., 2009. Evaluating alignment between curriculum. Assess. Instr.,
Rev. Educ. Res. 79 (4), 1332–1361. https://doi.org/10.3102/0034654309341375.
Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G.S., Dean, J., 2013. Distributed
representations of words and phrases and their compositionality. In: Burges, C.J.C.,
Bottou, L., Welling, M., Ghahramani, Z., Weinberger, K.Q. (Eds.), Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 26. Curran Associates, pp. 3111–3119. http://pape
rs.nips.cc/paper/5021-distributed-representations-of-words-and-phrases-and-their-c
ompositionality.pdf.
Milano, N., Casella, M., Esposito, R., Marocco, D., 2024. Exploring the potential of
variational autoencoders for modeling nonlinear relationships in psychological data.
Behav. Sci. 14 (7), 527.
Morris, J. X., Kuleshov, V., Shmatikov, V., & Rush, A. M. (2023). Text embeddings reveal
(almost) as much as text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06816.
Ni, J., Qu, C., Lu, J., Dai, Z., Ábrego, G. H., Ma, J., & Yang, Y. (2021a). Large dual
encoders are generalizable retrievers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.07899.
Ni, J., Abrego, G. H., Constant, N., Ma, J., Hall, K. B., Cer, D., & Yang, Y. (2021b).
Sentence-t5: scalable sentence encoders from pre-trained text-to-text models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2108.08877.
Nilsson, A.H., Schwartz, H.A., Rosenthal, R.N., McKay, J.R., Vu, H., Cho, Y.M., Ungar, L.,
2024. Language-based EMA assessments help understand problematic alcohol
consumption. PLoS One 19 (3), e0298300.
Nunnally, J.C., Bernstein, I., 1978. Psychometric Theory. MacGraw-Hill, New York.
Radford, A., Kim, J.W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S., Sutskever, I., 2021.
Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In:
Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR,
pp. 8748–8763.
Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D., & Sutskever, I. (2019). Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI Blog, 1(8), Article 9. https
://d4mucfpksywv.cloudfront.net/better-language-models/language_models_are_u
nsupervised_multitask_learners.pdf.
Reimers, N., & Gurevych, I. (2019). Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese
bert-networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084.

Rossiter, J.R., 2008. Content validity of measures of abstract constructs in management
and organizational research. Br. J. Manag. 19 (4), 380–388.
Rossiter, J.R., 2002. The C-OAR-SE procedure for scale development in marketing. Int. J.
Res. Mark. 19 (4), 305–335.
Schimmack, U., 2021. The validation crisis in psychology. Meta-Psychol. 5.
Smith, H. L., & Wright, W. W. (1928). Tests and measurements. Silver, Burdett. 6(3),
206–214. 10.1016/0022-4405(68)90017-4.
Sireci, S.G., 1998. The construct of content validity. Soc. Indic. Res. 45, 83–117.
Song, K., Tan, X., Qin, T., Lu, J., Liu, T.Y., 2020. Mpnet: masked and permuted pretraining for language understanding. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 33,
16857–16867.
Spoto, A., Nucci, M., Prunetti, E., Vicovaro, M., 2023. Improving content validity
evaluation of assessment instruments through formal content validity analysis.
Psychol. Methods.
Stevens, J., 2002. Applied Multivariate Statistics for the Social Sciences, 4. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ.
Van der Maaten, L., Hinton, G., 2008. Visualizing data using t-SNE. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 9
(11).
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Polosukhin, I.,
2017. Attention is all you need. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 30.
Wulff, D. U., & Mata, R. (2023). Automated jingle–jangle detection: using embeddings to
tackle taxonomic incommensurability.
Yang, Z., Dai, Z., Yang, Y., Carbonell, J., Salakhutdinov, R.R., Le, Q.V., 2019. Xlnet:
generalized autoregressive pretraining for language understanding. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst. 32, 5753–5763. https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.5555/3454287.34548
04.
Zhelezniak, V., Savkov, A., Shen, A., & Hammerla, N. Y. (2019). Correlation coefficients
and semantic textual similarity. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.07790.

Further readings
Kjell, O.N., Kjell, K., Garcia, D., Sikström, S., 2019. Semantic measures: using natural
language processing to measure, differentiate, and describe psychological constructs.
Psychol. Methods 24 (1), 92.
Reimers, N., Gurevych, I., 2019. Sentence-BERT: sentence embeddings using siamese
BERT-networks. In: Inui, K., Jiang, J., Ng, V., Wan, X. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2019
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP).
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 3982–3992. https://doi.org/
10.18653/v1/D19-1410.

13

