Neural network embeddings recover value dimensions
from psychometric survey items on par with human data
Max Pellert1 , Clemens M. Lechner2 , Indira Sen3 , Markus Strohmaier3,4
1

Barcelona Supercomputing Center 2 Jam Technologies GmbH
3
University of Mannheim
4
GESIS - Leibniz Institute for the Social Sciences
Correspondence: max.pellert@bsc.es

Abstract
We demonstrate that embeddings derived from
large language models, when processed with
"Survey and Questionnaire Item Embeddings
Differentials" (SQuID), can recover the structure of human values obtained from human
rater judgments on the Revised Portrait Value
Questionnaire (PVQ-RR). We compare multiple embedding models across a number of
evaluation metrics including internal consistency, dimension correlations and multidimensional scaling configurations. Unlike previous
approaches, SQuID addresses the challenge of
obtaining negative correlations between dimensions without requiring domain-specific finetuning or training data re-annotation. Quantitative analysis reveals that our embeddingbased approach explains 55% of variance in
dimension-dimension similarities compared to
human data. Multidimensional scaling configurations show alignment with pooled human data from 49 different countries. Generalizability tests across three personality inventories (IPIP, BFI-2, HEXACO) demonstrate
that SQuID consistently increases correlation
ranges, suggesting applicability beyond value
theory. These results show that semantic embeddings can effectively replicate psychometric structures previously established through
extensive human surveys. The approach offers
substantial advantages in cost, scalability and
flexibility while maintaining comparable quality to traditional methods. Our findings have
significant implications for psychometrics and
social science research, providing a complementary methodology that could expand the
scope of human behavior and experience represented in measurement tools.

1

Introduction

Psychometrics, the field of study in psychology that
is crucially concerned with measurement of human
attributes such as skills, personality or values, is undergoing a revolution with the integration of novel

NLP technologies to complement and extend traditional questionnaire-based workflows. Proposed
ideas range from the assessment of large language
models via "AI Psychometrics" (Pellert et al., 2024)
to "Machine Psychology" (Hagendorff, 2023) or,
more conservatively, to use LLMs as assisting tools
in human psychometrics to aid comparably cheap,
in-silico questionnaire item creation (Götz et al.,
2023) or automated coding (Nilsson et al., 2025).
For the closely related task of synthetic data generation (Hommel et al., 2022), LLMs have been used
to simulate segments of the population to match survey results (Argyle et al., 2023) over time (Ahnert
et al., 2025) and to replicate experimental studies
(Aher et al., 2023; Dillion et al., 2023).
The social and behavioral sciences crucially depend on texts that have been rated by human respondents. In psychology this is the traditional approach
to analyze traits that are not directly observable
such as value orientations (Schwartz and Cieciuch,
2022), personality (John et al., 2008) and attitudes
towards issues like gender beliefs (Kerr and Holden,
1996; Hill and Willoughby, 2005; Schudson and
van Anders, 2022), but the same holds also for
fields like political science, sociology and humancomputer interaction. Questionnaires, the instruments used to collect human rater judgments for
measurement, are typically developed iteratively.
First, researchers compile a large set of candidate
items based on theories of human experience and
behavior. Items are short statements or questions
believed to measure an underlying phenomenon,
which humans rate on verbal and/or numeric response scales, such as a five-point agree–disagree
scale. Through iterative procedures of elimination
and refinement, researchers ultimately arrive at a
final set of questionnaire items in which each item
ideally measures only one underlying dimension
of the phenomenon of interest (a property called
"simple structure"). In this process, descriptive
statistics and correlations among items obtained

5738
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EACL 2026, pages 5738–5752
March 24-29, 2026 ©2026 Association for Computational Linguistics

from samples of human raters are of paramount
interest (Repke et al., 2024). Especially the patterns of inter-correlations are crucial in identifying underlying dimensions measured by the items.
However, obtaining sufficiently large samples of
human raters, and letting them rate a large number
of candidate items, is often costly and plagued by
issues such as respondent fatigue, response style,
low literacy or lack of motivation. These problems
can compromise data quality and thwart a proper
assessment of the questionnaire’s properties. We
argue that addressing the challenge of obtaining
fast, cheap and ideally unbiased information on the
structure of questionnaires is a promising application area for NLP research.
Although the potential is large, critical evaluation has shown various limitations of existing
attempts to marry NLP technologies with social
scientific applications such as psychometric measurement (Löhn et al., 2024; Sühr et al., 2024).
We review selected representative approaches by
other researchers and discuss the problems they
face. Then, we present our novel methodological
advancement of "Survey and Questionnaire Item
Embeddings Differentials" (SQuID) and demonstrate with the Revised Portrait Value Questionnaire
(PVQ-RR) how it allows us to overcome issues that
we identified.
Research objective: We want to demonstrate
the power of neural embeddings in psychometric
workflows with the example of the PVQ-RR. Furthermore, we want to argue for this approach to
provide useful and interesting complements to human rater judgments.
Approach: We use LLMs to create semantic
embeddings of the text of psychometric questionnaire items. We choose a widely used survey on
value orientations that was carefully developed
and extensively validated to compare our embeddings approach to traditional human rater judgments (Schwartz and Cieciuch, 2022).
Results and contributions: We show that, unlike some of the related works we review claim, semantic embeddings from a general-purpose model
in combination with our methodological advancement can indeed recover very well the latent dimensions of a social scientific questionnaire. According to conventionally used quantitative evaluation metrics, we achieve a performance that is at
least on par with methods relying on human rater
judgments. Our robust findings demonstrate the
feasibility and the potential of the "semantic em-

beddings as human rater judgments" approach and
open a large domain of interesting research questions that can be tackled in powerful novel ways by
adapting well-established classical psychometric
analysis pipelines. While maintaining the same
level of quality, our approach based on semantic
embeddings is highly flexible, cheap and scales
very well.

2

Related Work

Researchers have proposed various ways of integrating LLMs in social scientific workflows. Typically, these efforts rely on repeatedly gathering
stochastic model output in web interfaces of commercial, closed black-box APIs or on using older,
smaller open models (Binz and Schulz, 2023; Fischer et al., 2023; Serapio-García et al., 2025). In
this section, we review the most relevant recent
literature that we found to be so far in the domain
of personality questionnaires.
First uses of embeddings to test the structure
of psychometric inventories
A number of recent studies have proposed using embeddings of questionnaire items from psychometric inventories—or various aggregates of
items. These embedding vectors can then be used
to create similarity matrices consisting of pairwise
similarities between all items or item aggregates.
These, in turn, can be analyzed with factor-analytic
or similar dimension-reduction methods in much
the same way that researchers have analyzed correlation matrices resulting from human subjects’
responses to psychometric inventories. On a fundamental level that also ensures full reproducibility, Cutler and Condon (2023) successfully replicated a classical human subject study on personality traits using an embedding approach. The authors created templates: "Those close to me say
I have a [MASK][MASK] and [TERM] personality." [TERM] is inserted from a list of personality
descriptors containing entries such as "condescending", the constructed statement is passed through
the model and the token embeddings of the two
[MASK] tokens are extracted and averaged. The
results of principal component analysis on that averaged embedding were reasonably similar to results
of a classical study on human ratings of personality
descriptors (Saucier and Goldberg, 1996) with 3
out of 5 factors adequately well recovered. The
authors used a less systematic and more combinatorial approach of running the same experiment with

5739

a large number of different models, all versions
of BERT, to find the best-performing one according to factor congruence scores with the original
human rater judgments. Interestingly, a model finetuned for Natural Language Inference (NLI) tasks,
the head of which was in fact discarded for this
setup (as only the two masked token embeddings
are extracted), performed best. Cutler and Condon
did not investigate why this model worked best.
Moreover, their template-based approach is largely
limited to personality inventories, for which this
structure is adequate. While their replication study
did not provide an explicit acknowledgment of the
generality of the approach, it presented pioneering evidence of the power of neural embeddings in
emulating human rater judgments.
Embedding items of different questionnaires
to compare them
Researchers have also taken a more macroperspective and worked with embeddings of data
sets that collect a number of different personality
questionnaires. Wulff and Mata (2025) finetune
a BERT based model on 200,000 pairs of items
and their empirical correlations to create a domainspecific embedding model. Laudably, they share
their model publicly on the Hugging Face Model
Hub 1 and we include it in our analyses. They
use their model to embed a large number of different personality items, scales and construct names.
These embeddings allow them to predict empirical
similarities between items reasonably well, to detect overlaps between scales and to suggest more
parsimonious taxonomies. Relying on a very similar base model, Hommel and Arslan (2025) used
finetuning to create an embedding model that allows them to establish inter-item correlations, scale
reliability and inter-scale correlations to some degree. Unfortunately, their model is not openly
shared and therefore cannot be used by us or by
other researchers.
First proposals of embeddings as part of the
psychometric toolbox
These approaches are generalized by Feraco
and Toffalini (2025) by building on the beforementioned "mpnet-personality" model to create
a pipeline module that allows researchers to run
in-silico validity checks on item candidates to identify problems in a cheap and easy way before any
empirical data from human raters is collected. Similarly, "pseudo-factor analysis" was recently pro1

https://huggingface.co/dwulff/mpnet-personality

posed as a pre-testing approach that allows evaluating the semantic structure of personality inventories (and potentially other psychological constructs)
(Guenole et al., 2025). Like the approach by Feraco and colleagues, pseudo-factor analyis is based
on embedding items or parcels of items and computing similarity matrices between embedding vectors, which can then be factor-analysed in the same
way as inter-item correlations of personality ratings
from human respondents are traditionally factor analyzed. Guenole and colleagues illustrated their
approach with two widely used personality inventories, reporting that pseudo-factor analyses was able
to replicate empirical findings on the structure of
these inventories obtained on human subject data
reasonably well, at least when using (the rather
permissive) oblique rotation. Despite these recent
advances, it remains unclear which of the many
different models and strategies for creating and
combining embeddings on different items or item
parcels works best, let alone why.
Missing negative correlations in embeddings
of psychometric inventories
In personality inventories and other psychometric inventories, it is common practice to use
both forward-keyed (e.g., "I am meticulous.") and
reverse-keyed items (e.g., "I am rather careless.")
to measure the same personality construct. Such
item pairs would be expected to correlate negatively with each other yet load on the same factor
(e.g. Conscientiousness). Likewise, constructs and
their subdimensions, such as the Big Five dimensions Neuroticism and Extraversion, often correlate
negatively with each other. Such negative correlations are important properties of both the semantic
space of psychological constructs and the empirical
data resulting from human responses to personality
inventories. However, Hommel and Arslan (2025,
p.7) reported an important problem: "negative coefficients are rarely produced when comparing vector
representations of sentences". This is evidenced
by the scatterplot of empirical and their predicted
inter-item similarities using embeddings which are
cutting of at 0. This problem—shared by all of
the abovementioned recent embeddings-based approaches—stems from the high-dimensional embeddings of item text containing much information
on general abstract linguistic features of natural
language use that are similar even across otherwise
semantically distinctly dissimilar item texts. The inability to reproduce negative correlations between
items constitutes a major impediment for repro-

5740

ducing patterns of correlations and factor loadings
obtained in human subjects through embeddingsbased approaches. Hommel and Arslan developed
a workaround that involves re-annotating an NLI
corpus (Williams et al., 2018) by assigning negative direction to predicted similarity when the example pair is labeled as contradictory in the corpus.
They then fine-tune their model on this adapted
data. This workaround seems to have the effect
of increasing performance for their use case because the model better learns to handle negation
and contradictions between item texts. Different
to that, Wulff and Mata decide to fully drop the
sign of the correlation and just consider "unsigned
(absolute) correlation as a measure of item relatedness" (2025, p.1 of SI). This approach can work for
the authors because all questionnaires that are analyzed by them are in the personality domain and,
therefore, exhibit a substantial similarity between
each other to start from. The degree of similarity
still provides important information. Also, Wulff
and Mata pre-process items by removing the starting pronoun "I", a form of stemming which can
be expected to remove one source of confounding shared abstract linguistic features and thereby
reduce similarities.
Different to these prior attempts, we aim for a
general methodology that can readily be applied
post-hoc to embeddings of diverse contexts also
different from personality derived from any model
without re-annotating training corpora and finetuning. As described in Section 4.2, we develop "Survey and Questionnaire Item Embeddings Differentials" (SQuID) as a general method that fulfills
these constraints and allows obtaining negative correlations.

3

Background

3.1 The theory of values
All the works discussed in Section 2 have so far
been in the domain of questionnaires for personality traits and attendant inventories (e.g., Big Five
and HEXACO), which are a natural starting point
because of the long research tradition of the ’lexical
approach’ investigating the semantic structure of
personality-descriptive adjectives and statements
(Guenole et al., 2025). However, for embeddingbased approaches to be a truly valuable addition
to the psychometric toolkit, their viability needs
to be demonstrated on additional constructs beyond personality traits. In our study, we there-

fore aim to go beyond personality inventories and
choose a widely used and well-established survey
for the important domain of values. According
to Schwartz’s theory of basic human values, values are trans-situational goals that serve as guiding
principles in people’s lives, expressing distinct motivational concerns. The "Revised Portrait Value
Questionnaire" (PVQ-RR) (Schwartz et al., 2012)
contains 57 items such as "It is important to him/her
to form his/her views independently.", "It is important to him/her that his/her country is secure and
stable.", "It is important to him/her to have a good
time.", which can be aggregated to 19 fine-grained
value dimensions such as "Self-direction Thought",
"Security-Societal" and "Hedonism" (3 items per
dimension). Human respondents rate how similar
they view themselves to the person described in the
item on a 6-point scale ranging from "not like me
at all" to "very much like me". The survey scoring rules that specify the dimension that each item
belongs to and can be aggregated to through averaging have been developed in a theory-guided way
that has been cross-culturally validated and refined
since the 1980s with human rater judgments from
49 countries (Schwartz and Cieciuch, 2022).
3.2 Fundamental assumptions when adapting
psychometric workflows to LLMs
To empirically test their theory, Schwartz et al. collect a large number human rater judgments on a prespecified response scale, for each of the 57 item of
the PVQ-RR: yi = (ri1 , ri2 , . . . , rin ) where each
rij represents the rating given by human j for item
i. In principle, this data is in the same format as
the item embeddings that we will extract from the
models: yi = (ei1 , ei2 , . . . , ein ) where each eij
represents the element j of the embedding vector
for item i. Both types of data can be used in the
same way in downstream psychometric analysis
pipelines (for a schematic overview see Figure 4).
3.3

Multidimensional Scaling and the
Centrality of Negative Correlations

Importantly, negative correlations between items
play a very important role in Schwartz’s theory
of the content and structure of human values.
Schwartz’s values are structured in a circumplex
model based on the compatibility and conflict between underlying motivations, whereby values that
motivationally oppose each other are placed on
opposite positions of the circle and correlate negatively with each other (e.g. Conformity vs. Self-

5741

direction), whereas closely related values that are
motivationally compatible with each other are positively correlated and located close to each other
on the same side of the circle (e.g. Achievement
and Power). The individual values can be further
aggregated to four higher-order dimensions corresponding to four segments of the circle that emerge
with great regularity in data from human respondents (Lechner et al., 2024).
This circular structure is uncovered using a
dimension-reduction technique that is different
from principal component analysis and factor
analysis as typically used for personality inventories: Multi-dimensional scaling (MDS) (Jung
and Takane, 2015; Groenen and Borg, 2015).
Schwartz’s theory and attendant inventories were
historically developed in close relationship with
this technique. MDS maps high-dimensional objects such as vectors of human rater judgments
or semantic embeddings to points in a lowerdimensional, typically 2D, space. The technique
works in such a way that points corresponding to
similar objects are located close together, while
dissimilar objects are located far apart, thereby preserving distances. The MDS configurations that
are computed from human rater judgments confirm
those relationships between values as postulated
by the theory. We can therefore empirically validate the theoretically assumed circular placement
of values using MDS with human rater judgments
(Schwartz and Cieciuch, 2022), while, until now, it
was an open question if the same is possible with an
embedding approach. The paramount importance
of negative correlations between items renders
Schwartz’s value theory and the PVQ-RR an ideal
(though challenging) case to refine embeddingsbased approaches such that they reproduce negative
correlations between items foundational to value
theory.

4

Experimental Setup

4.1 Embedding Models
Rapid development makes systematic model reviews quickly outdated. We therefore strategically
selected models representative of specific model
classes and types. This way, we can provide some
guidance on which models typically to look for in
this application area also in the future.
First, we choose the currently best performing
open model for semantic textual similarity (STS)
tasks in "MTEB: Massive Text Embedding Bench-

mark" (Muennighoff et al., 2023), Linq-EmbedMistral (7.11B, prompt, Choi et al. 2024). In
addition, we choose the currently best performing closed API model in the benchmark, geminiembedding-exp-03-07 (parameter count not disclosed, no prompt). Furthermore, we include two
smaller models created with innovative training
and data strategies that allow them to perform
well for their size, jina-embeddings-v3 (572M, no
prompt, Sturua et al. 2024) and KaLM-embeddingmultilingual-mini-instruct-v1.5 (494M, prompt, Hu
et al. 2025). Finally, we include the model
mpnet-personality (109M, no prompt) that, as discussed before, was created through domain specific finetuning. Our approach does not need extensive prompt engineering, any sophisticated token probability extraction strategies or accounting
for stochasticity of outputs. In a growing social
scientific literature of using LLMs for empirical
investigations, instead of interacting with models
on the textual output level we show the advantages
of working on the fundamental level of semantic
embeddings. We use the exact wording from the
PVQ-RR questionnaire specifications (see Subsection A.7) for those models that allow including a
prompt2 . The PVQ-RR is available in gendered version using different pronouns. We account for this
feature by creating an average of the female and
male item embeddings in order to reduce possible
gender biases.
As we go through in detail in Subsection 5.1, we
find evidence that the MTEB benchmark is actually
a good guide for selecting models for this task.
There is reason to expect that future models that
score even better on the benchmark will likely still
outperform our already strong results.
4.2

Survey and Questionnaire Item
Embeddings Differentials (SQuID)

Working with raw embeddings as directly retrieved
from the models, we faced the same problem
of missing negative correlations as the other researchers whose work we discussed in Section 2
(see the similarity matrix on the left of Figure 7).
As we will use MDS for dimensionality reduction
which crucially builds on preserving distances, it
was especially important for us to find a way to
make the signal of negative correlations stronger.
As discussed before, the root of the problem lies
in the high-dimensionality of item embeddings that
2

We run all models on CPU to embed all 57 items in less
than 20 minutes on a standard ThinkPad T480 from 2018.

5742

encode many common linguistic features of natural language use which artificially boost similarity
between items. To create a vector that captures
this unneeded information, we take an average embedding over all items (a "questionnaire embedding") and subtract it from each of the item embeddings: yi − y for item i, where y is anP
average
1
over all 57 items of the PVQ-RR: y = 57 57
i=1 yi .
This straightforward method is inspired by the early
examples of vector arithmetic demonstrated with
Word2Vec (Mikolov et al., 2013) and the more recent idea of community embeddings (Waller and
Anderson, 2021). As can be seen in the right hand
part of Figure 7, this approach is simple yet very effective in making the signal of negative correlations
appear without any domain-specific finetuning or
other adaption procedures. SQuID works with any
model and embeddings of arbitrary dimensions, offering a high degree of flexibility. We believe that
a substantial part of the under-performance of embedding approaches compared to human data in
other studies, is due to methodological reasons and
can be overcome with SQuID.

5.1.2

Dimension-dimension correlations of
human rater judgments and embeddings

We create a dimension-dimension similarity matrix
(using Pearson correlation) for both the embeddings (shown in Subsection A.6) and the human
data. The 171 pairs of both types of data positively
correlate substantially: 0.74 [0.66, 0.80]. Figure
1 shows the scatter plot and parameters of a simple linear model that explains 55% of the variance
observed.

Results

Correlation between dimension pairs

Unless otherwise noted, the results presented here
are derived from SQuID treated embeddings from
the best-performing model "Linq-Embed-Mistral".
For performance of all models compared to the
human rater judgment data as measured with factor
congruence scores, see Table 3.

0.50

Human raters

5

(Mij ∼ N (0, 1)) for each item. We repeat the
procedure 10 000 times and report average values
of Cronbach’s alpha for each dimension in these
random embeddings. In addition to reporting all
19 values for each model, human data and random
embeddings, we also provide an overall average
over all dimensions. In Table 1, we find that LinqEmbed-Mistral is the best performing model. It
beats the other approaches 14 out of 19 times and
has the highest average Cronbach’s alpha over all
dimensions (including being slightly higher than
the one measured from the human data).

y = −0.00283 + 0.891 x
R 2 = 0.55

0.25
0.00
−0.25

5.1

Validity checks

5.1.1 Internal consistency

−0.25

Following Schwartz and Cieciuch (2022), we employ Cronbach’s alpha to assess the internal consistency of latent dimensions. Through functional
equivalence in this context (for details see Subsection A.3), we can directly compare embeddings of
all our candidate models with human data3 . Cronbach’s alpha compares the amount of shared variance among the items of a dimension to the amount
of overall variance. In previous research, performance baselines of random embeddings have been
shown to be higher than intuitively expected in
some scenarios (Wieting and Kiela, 2019). To assess which baseline levels we reach, we produce
a vector with 4096 normally distributed values
3
We retrieve the human rater judgment data from Table S2
in SI of Schwartz and Cieciuch (2022) which reports averages
over 49 countries.

0.00

0.25

0.50

Embeddings

Figure 1: Relationship between item similarity (Pearson correlation) derived from embeddings (SQuID
treated) and human data. We explain more than half
of the variance with a simple linear model.

5.2

MDS configuration from embeddings

We turn the dimension-dimension correlation matrix of Subsection A.6 into a dissimilarity matrix.
We use multidimensional scaling4 to reduce the
high-dimensional dissimilarity matrix to a two dimensional space that preserves distances between
dimensions. Figure 2 shows the resulting circular
structure.
4

mds with ’type="ordinal"’ from the R package smacof
(Mair et al., 2022), for details see code file.

5743

gemini
jina
kalm
linq
mpnet
N (0, 1)
human

gemini
jina
kalm
linq
mpnet
N (0, 1)
human

AC

BEC

BED

COI

COR

FAC

HE

HUM

POD

POR

0.45
0.60
0.61
0.72
0.37
-0.06
0.60

0.74
0.77
0.72
0.89
0.74
-0.06
0.74

0.71
0.76
0.70
0.68
0.52
-0.06
0.69

0.80
0.73
0.76
0.83
0.68
-0.04
0.75

0.74
0.77
0.79
0.90
0.75
-0.06
0.81

0.47
0.51
0.34
0.53
0.18
-0.04
0.68

0.63
0.69
0.62
0.72
0.62
-0.04
0.73

0.34
0.22
0.23
0.46
-0.05
-0.04
0.47

0.74
0.58
0.64
0.82
0.63
-0.04
0.73

0.74
0.83
0.81
0.87
0.88
-0.06
0.76

SDA

SDT

SEP

SES

ST

TR

UNC

UNN

UNT

µ

0.78
0.78
0.79
0.82
0.55
-0.06
0.66

0.57
0.66
0.68
0.68
0.36
-0.04
0.65

0.54
0.49
0.62
0.66
0.50
-0.06
0.58

0.67
0.81
0.68
0.91
0.58
-0.04
0.77

0.65
0.73
0.71
0.78
0.72
-0.06
0.67

0.70
0.76
0.82
0.83
0.81
-0.06
0.80

0.53
0.49
0.63
0.77
0.49
-0.04
0.73

0.66
0.79
0.85
0.92
0.86
-0.04
0.83

0.72
0.73
0.71
0.85
0.63
-0.06
0.71

0.64
0.67
0.67
0.77
0.57
-0.05
0.70

Table 1: Internal consistency as measured through Cronbach’s alpha for each of the 19 value dimensions
and the average over dimensions. Rowname abbreviations refer to the models covered in Subsection 4.1 (all
embeddings were SQuID treated). We report a random baseline of embeddings created from a normal distribution
with mean zero and unit variance (averages over 10 000 samples). Human data is retrieved from Table S2 in SI of
Schwartz and Cieciuch (2022). Linq-Embed-Mistral is generally the best performing embedding model with an
average value for Cronbach’s alpha that is above even the human benchmark. Values close to 0.8 or above for most
value dimensions point to adequate internal consistency (with notable exceptions such as HUM/humility, which is
also low in the human data). For fully spelled out dimension names in the column header see Figure 7.

5.3 Procrustes matrix transformation to
compare human data and embeddings
Next, we want to compare the embeddings MDS
configuration to the empirical configuration of
Schwartz and Cieciuch (2022)5 derived from human rater judgments. As MDS configurations are
not unique, arbitrary matrix transformations such
as translation, rotation and reflection are admissible
because these operations do not change pairwise
distances. We use Procrustes matrix transformation6 with the human configuration as target and the
embeddings configuration as testee. This way, we
transform the embeddings configuration to achieve
maximum similarity with the human rater judgments configuration. To quantitatively assess the
similarity of the two MDS configurations after Procrustes transformation of the embeddings MDS
configuration matrix, we compute cosine similarities of the vectors of the two first dimensions (X
5

We compute the human MDS configuration from the
pooled correlation matrix over all 49 countries shared by the
authors as Table S10 of SI.
6
procrustes from the R package vegan

coordinates in the configuration plot) as well as
the two second dimensions (Y coordinates). These
congruence coefficients are 0.88 for the first and
0.82 for the second dimension. To further assess
similarities and differences between individual dimensions, Figure 3 allows for visual assessment of
the two configurations.

Figure 2: Unrotated MDS configuration derived
from SQuID treated embeddings. As value dimensions are placed according to their distances to each
other, a circular structure emerges. For fully spelled out
dimension names see Figure 7.

5744

5.4 Generalizability to other questionnaires

6

To assess whether SQuID generalizes beyond value
theory, we apply the method to three widely-used
personality questionnaires: the International Personality Item Pool (IPIP) (Goldberg, 1992), the Big
Five Inventory-2 (BFI-2) (Soto and John, 2017),
and the HEXACO Personality Inventory (Lee and
Ashton, 2018). These personality measures differ from the PVQ-RR in both theoretical structure and item content, providing a rigorous test
of SQuID’s domain generality. Similar to value
theory, a challenge in personality measurement is
capturing negative correlations between items with
opposing content. The range of inter-item correlations thus serves as a critical metric: wider ranges
indicate that embeddings successfully capture both
positive associations between similar items and
negative relationships between opposing items. Table 2 shows that SQuID substantially increases correlation ranges across all models for the IPIP questionnaire. Raw embeddings exhibit limited ranges
(0.14 to 0.82 depending on model), but SQuID
treatment expands these dramatically. The average relative gain in range is 261.5%, with individual models showing improvements from 21.20%
(mpnet, which was already optimized for personality content through domain-specific finetuning)
to 724.39% (kalm). Notably, even models that initially showed reasonable raw ranges (e.g., mpnet
at 0.82) benefit from SQuID. We observe similar
patterns for BFI-2 (average relative gain over all
models: 207.2%) and HEXACO (147.9%). These
consistent improvements across multiple personality inventories suggest that SQuID can be applied
broadly to psychometric measurement.

Our validation checks uncover that value dimensions contained in neural embeddings can display
internal consistency on par with human data (or
even above). As a comparison baseline, we find no
meaningful values for randomly initiated embeddings. Correlation of dimension-dimension similarities for human data and embeddings show substantial agreement between the two types of data. We
find no bias in regressing one on the other, a strong
positive relationship and a moderately high coefficient of determination for a simple linear model.
In the embeddings configuration of Figure 2,
we can see the circular structure emerging that is
postulated by Schwartz and Cieciuch (2022). Values that are facets of the same phenomenon (like
"Universalism-Concern", "Universalism-Nature"
and "Universalism-Tolerance") are placed close together. Values that are seen as distant to Universalism (such as "Power Dominance" and "Power
Resource") are placed far apart on the circular structure, roughly on the opposite side. The same can
be observed with the facets of "Self-Direction" in
comparison to the facets of "Conformity". The results allow for a visual interpretation that follows
quite closely along the lines of the canonical theory
of value orientations that powers the PVQ-RR.
Comparing the two MDS configurations after
Procrustes transformation shows fair similarity according to conventional interpretations of congruence coefficients (for details see Section A.5). That
we find the two configurations to be fairly similar on this formal criterion is quite surprising
given that they derive from two very distinct data
sources. Inspection of individual dimensions in Figure 3 reveals strong overlaps (e.g., Security facets,
Conformity-Interpersonal, Power Resources) and
some differences (e.g., Stimulation is placed closer
to Hedonism in the embeddings configuration).

Raw SQuID Abs.
Rel.
Range Range Gain Gain (%)
gemini
jina
kalm
linq
mpnet

0.35
0.66
0.14
0.23
0.82

0.92
1.30
1.19
0.92
1.00

0.57
0.64
1.04
0.69
0.17

161.88
95.97
724.39
304.13
21.20

7

Table 2: Comparison of raw vs SQuID embeddings
across all models for the IPIP personality questionnaire. Raw Range and SQuID Range show correlation
ranges. Absolute Gain shows the increase in range,
while Relative Gain shows the percentage improvement.

Discussion

Conclusion

We introduced our methodological advancement
of SQuID and show with the example of the PVQRR that it allows an embedding approach to reach
performance on par with human data in extracting
latent value dimensions according to several evaluation metrics. We envision many new directions of
research to emerge from psychometric approaches
to AI. As one example, our approach allows for a
systematic and rigorous investigation of potential
cultural biases contained in LLMs: Schwartz and

5745

search should decompose this unexplained variance
to better understand the complementary information each data source provides.

Figure 3: Comparison of MDS configurations from
embeddings and from human data. The configurations are shown after Procrustes similarity transformation. Human data in red, embeddings in blue. We find
few long and few strongly overlapping lines evidencing general similarity of the two configurations derived
from two distinct types of data. For fully spelled out
dimension names see Figure 7.

Cieciuch (2022) confirmed their theories across 49
countries using translated questionnaires. We see
an exciting opportunity to use our approach and
MDS configurations on the level of those individual countries to systematically assess closeness or
distance of an LLM to certain cultural value orientations quantitatively by computing congruence
coefficients and other error metrics. Working on
the embedding level, as we propose, limits sources
of potential methodological biases like token extraction strategies that are necessary when working
with generated text instead.
The fundamental difference between human
rater judgments and neural embeddings as data
sources raises important questions about what each
captures. Human ratings reflect conscious, individual self-assessment assumed to be influenced by the
traits to be measured. In contrast, embeddings represent semantic relationships derived from statistical regularities in language use learned from vast
text corpora by neural models. That these two data
sources converge to produce similar psychometric
structures (R² of 0.55, fair congruence coefficients)
suggests that they nevertheless tap into shared underlying semantic spaces. The 45% of variance
not explained by our linear model could stem from
genuine differences in what the two data types measure, psychometric noise in human responses (e.g.
response styles, measurement error) or systematic
biases in language model training data. Future re-

While our results demonstrate SQuID’s effectiveness for value orientations (PVQ-RR) and initial tests show promise for personality inventories
(IPIP, BFI-2, HEXACO), systematic evaluation
across additional psychometric domains remains
an important direction for future research. We
suggest several priority areas: First, researchers
should test SQuID on questionnaires with different
structural properties. The PVQ-RR exhibits a circumplex structure suited to multidimensional scaling, while personality inventories typically employ
factor-analytic approaches. Testing on hierarchical
models, formative constructs or network-based psychometric structures would clarify boundary conditions. Second, questionnaires employing reversekeyed items require methodological refinement. As
noted in our limitations, directly "reversing" embeddings is conceptually unclear. One possible
approach could involve computing separate scale
embeddings for regular and reverse-keyed items,
then subtracting separately from the two types of
items. This extension would at least better handle the intentional polarity inversions common in
personality and attitude measures. Third, extend
testing to attitudes, motivational orientations and
clinical inventories, which may require methodological adaptations. Finally, multilingual testing
would establish whether SQuID’s benefits generalize across languages.
We view our methodological proposal as complementary to both traditional workflows as well
as to novel approaches in the (social) sciences. By
adopting embeddings approaches, we don’t aim
to replace human participants. Also well into the
future, researchers will have good reasons to study
humans, at the bare minimum to provide necessary reference points for comparison as we demonstrated in our analyses. But different to ideas discussed before, such as "pseudo-factor analysis"
(Guenole et al., 2025), we want to go beyond
merely creating another step in the typical validation pipeline in psychometrics. We see potential
beyond that: With these novel technologies we can
potentially investigate the full and diverse spectrum
of expression in all natural languages. This creates
novel opportunities to expand the scope of human
behavior and experience represented in measurement tools.

5746

Limitations
Future research will have to uncover more of the
peculiarities of that novel kind of data in the form
of semantic embeddings for (social) scientific applications. More experience with the data will in turn
help the methods (and the theories). We see "neural
embeddings as human rater judgments" as a good
working hypothesis and don’t want to imply that
both data are exactly the same and capture human
behavior and experience in exactly the same way.
As with other synthetic data, novel treatments such
as specific transformation (in addition to general
methodologies like SQuID) and other processing
steps may be necessary depending on the application context.
Questions of measurement validity arise: Do
findings from the human domain hold generally?
In this emerging field, we don’t yet have established answers to these questions. We can face
unexpected problems, as for example with questionnaire scoring rules that do prescribe to reverse
certain items for data quality reasons. With human
rater judgments this can be done in a straightforward way (by subtracting the rating from the maximum score possible as a response), but how do
we "reverse" semantic embeddings in a meaningful
way? Novel methodological questions like these
appear often and have to be addressed in future
research. With our work, we want to make a strong
argument that it is worth attempting to provide answers.
The PVQ-RR is openly available on the internet
and it could have been part of the training corpus of
the models that we use. The models’ direct memorization of its items and the underlying theory could
potentially influence our results and limit the scope
of our methodology when applied to different, less
easily accessible contexts. We don’t think that this
is a crucial issue as we provide no information to
the models on our aim to reconstruct value configurations from embeddings, by using only the generic
prompt from the survey instructions (see Subsection A.7) or by using no prompt at all. Furthermore,
our best performing model "Linq-Embed-Mistral"
has only moderate size with 7.11B parameters and
performs well in the diverse tasks of the "Massive
Text Embedding Benchmark" (Muennighoff et al.,
2023), which points to its general capabilities.
The notion of "similarity" is actually not welldefined as a classical discussion in philosophy
shows. The argument goes against the existence of

a strong logical underpinning of notions of similarity, while its practical relevance is acknowledged.
Similarity is considered "still serviceable in the
streets" (Goodman, 1972). Some parts of the original logical argument have been debated and countered (Leitgeb, 2007). We further want to note that
our metaphor of semantic embeddings as human
rater judgments helps us to prevent some concerns:
Each dimension of semantic embeddings as the
equivalent to a human rater judgment provides the
necessary context ("similar to what?") to justify
relative assessments of similarity for our use case.

Ethics Statement
The technology of using semantic embeddings in
research in ways that are similar to human rater
judgments can become a common and established
practice (as proposed for example by Guenole et al.,
2025). For researchers, we see obvious benefits as
they will be provided with a novel way of gathering and analyzing data. This approach potentially promises to capture a richer tapestry of human behavior and experience than conventional
methods relying on WEIRD (Western, Educated,
Industrialized, Rich, Democratic) college student
populations. In addition to such convenience samples, human rater judgments are typically sourced
from crowdworkers that carry out tasks at often low
hourly wages. There is reason to hope that crowdworking platforms react to technology changes
with a quality initiative that leads to better opportunities for crowdworkers to earn adequate incomes.
Still, crowdworking delivers income to people
around the world that come from many marginalized groups. Although it can leave workers underpaid, it is an integral and existential part of many
lives. Failures of platforms to react and dwindling
numbers of crowdworking jobs (that are instead
outsourced to LLMs) can leave many people worse
off than before.
On another, more distant future, level, we could
also see some danger in people accepting analyses
based on semantical embeddings as some kind of
"gold standard", a LLM normality to compare with
the results of humans, forgetting about many possible biases. Abstractly, like any assessment, this
could increase the danger of diagnosing somebody
as abnormal vis-a-vis an unattainable standard.
Generally, we see potential harm to fall mostly
proportional on all parts of the population in terms
of race, gender or class. However, potential lack of

5747

jobs for crowdworkers can be expected to have a
disproportionate effect on people on low incomes in
less affluent (and predominantly English-speaking)
parts of the world. In addition, we try to limit the
potential harm of creating novel synthetic LLM
norms by restricting ourselves to a questionnaire
of value orientations such as the PVQ-RR that is
rather uncontroversial and is not positing any "correct" or "normal" value orientations for individuals.

Andrew Cutler and David M. Condon. 2023. Deep lexical hypothesis: Identifying personality structure in
natural language. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 125(1):173–197.

References

Tommaso Feraco and Enrico Toffalini. 2025. SEMbeddings: How to evaluate model misfit before data
collection using large-language models. Frontiers in
Psychology, 15:1433339.

Suhaib Abdurahman, Huy Vu, Wanling Zou, Lyle Ungar, and Sudeep Bhatia. 2024. A deep learning
approach to personality assessment: Generalizing
across items and expanding the reach of survey-based
research. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 126(2):312–331.
Gati Aher, Rosa I. Arriaga, and Adam Tauman Kalai.
2023. Using large language models to simulate multiple humans and replicate human subject studies.
In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference
on Machine Learning, ICML’23, Honolulu, Hawaii,
USA. JMLR.org.
Georg Ahnert, Max Pellert, David Garcia, and Markus
Strohmaier. 2025. Extracting Affect Aggregates
from Longitudinal Social Media Data with Temporal Adapters for Large Language Models. Preprint,
arXiv:2409.17990.

preprocessing, estimating, and analyzing semantic
networks. Psychological Methods.

Danica Dillion, Niket Tandon, Yuling Gu, and Kurt
Gray. 2023. Can AI language models replace human
participants? Trends in Cognitive Sciences.

Ronald Fischer, Markus Luczak-Roesch, and Johannes A. Karl. 2023. What does ChatGPT return
about human values? Exploring value bias in ChatGPT using a descriptive value theory. arXiv preprint.
ArXiv:2304.03612 [cs].
Lewis R. Goldberg. 1992. The development of markers for the Big-Five factor structure. Psychological
Assessment, 4(1):26–42.
Nelson Goodman. 1972. Seven strictures on similarity.
In Problems and projects. Bobs-Merril.
Patrick J.F. Groenen and Ingwer Borg. 2015. Multidimensional Scaling II. In International Encyclopedia
of the Social & Behavioral Sciences, pages 40–47.
Elsevier.

Lisa P. Argyle, Ethan C. Busby, Nancy Fulda, Joshua R.
Gubler, Christopher Rytting, and David Wingate.
2023. Out of One, Many: Using Language Models to Simulate Human Samples. Political Analysis,
pages 1–15.

Nigel Guenole, E. Damiano D’Urso, Andrew Samo,
Tianjun Sun, and Jonas M B Haslbeck. 2025. Enhancing Scale Development: Pseudo Factor Analysis
of Language Embedding Similarity Matrices.

Jan Ketil Arnulf and Kai Rune Larsen. 2021. Semantic
and ontological structures of psychological attributes.
In Measuring and Modeling Persons and Situations,
pages 69–101. Elsevier.

Friedrich M. Götz, Rakoen Maertens, Sahil Loomba,
and Sander van der Linden. 2023. Let the algorithm
speak: How to use neural networks for automatic
item generation in psychological scale development.
Psychological Methods.

Jan Ketil Arnulf, Kai Rune Larsen, Øyvind Lund Martinsen, and Chih How Bong. 2014. Predicting Survey
Responses: How and Why Semantics Shape Survey
Statistics on Organizational Behaviour. PLoS ONE,
9(9):e106361.

Thilo Hagendorff. 2023. Machine Psychology: Investigating Emergent Capabilities and Behavior in
Large Language Models Using Psychological Methods. Preprint, arXiv:2303.13988.

Marcel Binz and Eric Schulz. 2023. Using cognitive
psychology to understand GPT-3. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 120(6):e2218523120.
Publisher: Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences.
Chanyeol Choi, Junseong Kim, Seolhwa Lee, Jihoon
Kwon, Sangmo Gu, Yejin Kim, Minkyung Cho, and
Jy-yong Sohn. 2024. Linq-Embed-Mistral Technical
Report. Preprint, arXiv:2412.03223.
Alexander P. Christensen and Yoed N. Kenett. 2021.
Semantic network analysis (SemNA): A tutorial on

Darryl B. Hill and Brian L. B. Willoughby. 2005. The
Development and Validation of the Genderism and
Transphobia Scale. Sex Roles, 53(7-8):531–544.
Björn E. Hommel, Franz-Josef M. Wollang, Veronika
Kotova, Hannes Zacher, and Stefan C. Schmukle.
2022. Transformer-Based Deep Neural Language
Modeling for Construct-Specific Automatic Item
Generation. Psychometrika, 87(2):749–772.
Björn Erik Hommel and Ruben C. Arslan. 2025. Language models accurately infer correlations between
psychological items and scales from text alone.

5748

Xinshuo Hu, Zifei Shan, Xinping Zhao, Zetian Sun,
Zhenyu Liu, Dongfang Li, Shaolin Ye, Xinyuan Wei,
Qian Chen, Baotian Hu, Haofen Wang, Jun Yu, and
Min Zhang. 2025. KaLM-Embedding: Superior
Training Data Brings A Stronger Embedding Model.
Preprint, arXiv:2501.01028.
Oliver P. John, Laura P. Naumann, and Christopher J.
Soto. 2008. Paradigm shift to the integrative Big Five
trait taxonomy: History, measurement, and conceptual issues. In Handbook of personality: Theory and
research, 3rd ed, pages 114–158. The Guilford Press,
New York, NY, US.
Kwanghee Jung and Yoshio Takane. 2015. Multidimensional Scaling I. In International Encyclopedia of the
Social & Behavioral Sciences, pages 34–39. Elsevier.
Paula S. Kerr and Ronald R. Holden. 1996. Development of the Gender Role Beliefs Scale (GRBS).
Journal of Social Behavior & Personality, 11:3–16.
Place: US Publisher: Select Press.
Oscar N. E. Kjell, Sverker Sikström, Katarina Kjell, and
H. Andrew Schwartz. 2022. Natural language analyzed with AI-based transformers predict traditional
subjective well-being measures approaching the theoretical upper limits in accuracy. Scientific Reports,
12(1):3918.
Clemens M. Lechner, Constanze Beierlein, Eldad Davidov, and Shalom H. Schwartz. 2024. Measuring the
Four Higher-Order Values in Schwartz’s Theory: Validation of a 17-Item Inventory. Journal of Personality
Assessment, 106(5):651–664.
Kibeom Lee and Michael C. Ashton. 2018. Psychometric Properties of the HEXACO-100. Assessment,
25(5):543–556.

Niklas Muennighoff, Nouamane Tazi, Loic Magne, and
Nils Reimers. 2023. MTEB: Massive Text Embedding Benchmark. In Proceedings of the 17th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 2014–2037,
Dubrovnik, Croatia. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
August Håkan Nilsson, J. Malte Runge, Adithya V.
Ganesan, Carl Viggo N. G. Lövenstierne, Nikita Soni,
and Oscar N. E. Kjell. 2025. Automatic implicit motive codings are at least as accurate as humans’ and
99% faster. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 128(6):1371–1392.
Max Pellert, Clemens M. Lechner, Claudia Wagner,
Beatrice Rammstedt, and Markus Strohmaier. 2024.
AI Psychometrics: Assessing the Psychological Profiles of Large Language Models Through Psychometric Inventories. Perspectives on Psychological
Science.
Lydia Repke, Lukas Birkenmaier, and Clemens Lechner.
2024. Validity in Survey Research - From Research
Design to Measurement Instruments (GESIS Survey Guidelines). Technical report, GESIS - LeibnizInstitute for the Social Sciences.
Hannes Rosenbusch, Florian Wanders, and Ilse L. Pit.
2020. The Semantic Scale Network: An online tool
to detect semantic overlap of psychological scales
and prevent scale redundancies. Psychological Methods, 25(3):380–392.
Gerard Saucier and Lewis R. Goldberg. 1996. Evidence
for the Big Five in analyses of familiar English personality adjectives. European Journal of Personality,
10(1):61–77.

Hannes Leitgeb. 2007. A New Analysis of Quasianalysis. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 36(2):181–226.
Publisher: Springer.

Zach C. Schudson and Sari M. van Anders. 2022. Gender/sex diversity beliefs: Scale construction, validation, and links to prejudice. Group Processes &
Intergroup Relations, 25(4):1011–1036.

Lea Löhn, Niklas Kiehne, Alexander Ljapunov, and
Wolf-Tilo Balke. 2024. Is machine psychology here?
On requirements for using human psychological tests
on large language models. In Proceedings of the 17th
International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 230–242, Tokyo, Japan. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Shalom H. Schwartz and Jan Cieciuch. 2022. Measuring the Refined Theory of Individual Values in 49
Cultural Groups: Psychometrics of the Revised Portrait Value Questionnaire. Assessment, 29(5):1005–
1019.

Urbano Lorenzo-Seva and Jos M. F. Ten Berge. 2006.
Tucker’s Congruence Coefficient as a Meaningful
Index of Factor Similarity. Methodology, 2(2):57–
64.
Patrick Mair, Patrick Groenen, and Jan de Leeuw. 2022.
Multidimensional scaling using majorization: SMACOF in R. Journal of Statistical Software, 102(10).
Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey
Dean. 2013. Efficient Estimation of Word Representations in Vector Space. Preprint, arXiv:1301.3781.

Shalom H. Schwartz, Jan Cieciuch, Michele Vecchione,
Eldad Davidov, Ronald Fischer, Constanze Beierlein,
Alice Ramos, Markku Verkasalo, Jan-Erik Lönnqvist,
Kursad Demirutku, Ozlem Dirilen-Gumus, and Mark
Konty. 2012. Refining the theory of basic individual
values. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
103(4):663–688.
Greg Serapio-García, Mustafa Safdari, Clément Crepy,
Luning Sun, Stephen Fitz, Peter Romero, Marwa
Abdulhai, Aleksandra Faust, and Maja Matarić.
2025. Personality Traits in Large Language Models. Preprint, arXiv:2307.00184.

5749

Christopher J. Soto and Oliver P. John. 2017. The next
Big Five Inventory (BFI-2): Developing and assessing a hierarchical model with 15 facets to enhance
bandwidth, fidelity, and predictive power. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 113(1):117–143.
Saba Sturua, Isabelle Mohr, Mohammad Kalim Akram,
Michael Günther, Bo Wang, Markus Krimmel, Feng
Wang, Georgios Mastrapas, Andreas Koukounas,
Nan Wang, and Han Xiao. 2024. Jina-embeddingsv3: Multilingual Embeddings With Task LoRA.
Preprint, arXiv:2409.10173.
Tom Sühr, Florian E. Dorner, Samira Samadi, and Augustin Kelava. 2024. Challenging the Validity of Personality Tests for Large Language Models. Preprint,
arXiv:2311.05297.
Isaac Waller and Ashton Anderson. 2021. Quantifying social organization and political polarization in
online platforms. Nature.
John Wieting and Douwe Kiela. 2019. No Training
Required: Exploring Random Encoders for Sentence
Classification. arXiv preprint. ArXiv:1901.10444
[cs].
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman.
2018. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sentence understanding through inference. In Proceedings of the 2018 conference of the north american
chapter of the association for computational linguistics: Human language technologies, volume 1 (long
papers), pages 1112–1122, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Dirk U. Wulff and Rui Mata. 2025. Semantic embeddings reveal and address taxonomic incommensurability in psychological measurement. Nature Human
Behaviour.

A

Appendix

In our paper repository7 , we share documented
code that allows other researchers to fully replicate
our results using openly available data.
A.1 Older lines of research on survey item
similarity

A.2

Different, but related uses of semantic
embeddings as human rater judgments

Researchers have used embeddings that they
trained to predict rating scales as a way to analyze descriptive wordresponses by human participants (Kjell et al., 2022). They find that a BERT
model works well for this task, especially with
word embeddings. With a slightly different twist,
researchers used item embeddings together with human rater judgments of personality items to predict
ratings of completely new items that had not been
rated by any participant yet (Abdurahman et al.,
2024).
A.3

Cronbach’s Alpha of human rater
judgments and embeddings

We compute Cronbach’s Alpha according to the
usual formula
!
Pk
2
σ
k
y
α=
1 − i=12 i
k−1
σy
where k represents the number of items in the dimension, for the PVQ-RR k = 3
σy2i the variance associated with each item i
σy2 the variance associated with the total scores
P
y = ki=1 yi
For the human rater judgments:

yi = (ri1 , ri2 , . . . , rin )
where each rij represents the rating given by
human rater j for item i.

For completeness sake, we want to mention that
work on semantic similarity of test items goes
back before the recent developments in NLP research of 2017/18, e.g. Arnulf et al. (2014). The
usual approach back then was to create item embeddings and to compare them with each other
for similarity using latent semantic analysis (LSA)
(Rosenbusch et al., 2020; Arnulf and Larsen, 2021).
Schematically, researchers used singular value decomposition on the co-occurence matrix of terms
7

within items. The creation of semantic networks
of items is a similar, related approach (Christensen
and Kenett, 2021). Classic use cases for those
approaches involve researchers to come up with
sample items that are then used to find already existing scales containing similar items or to check
for item redundancy.

For the embeddings:
yi = (ei1 , ei2 , . . . , ein )
where each eij represents the element j of the embedding vector for item i.
A.4

PCA instead of MDS

As a robustness check, we replace MDS with PCA8 .
In Figure 5, we plot the first two dimensions that
8

https://github.com/maxpel/embeddings_values

5750

prcomp in R with ’center = TRUE’ and ’scale = TRUE’

LLM to create
embeddings
from individual
texts (items)

Checks of internal
consistency
(Cronbach's
alpha)

Embeddings

Similarity matrix
(of dimensions)

Subtract scale
embedding

Human rater
judgments

Take average
of items of
one dimension

From this point:
Analysis pipeline
the same for both
types of data

Similarity
checks
(correlation)

Compare
embedding
and human
data solution

Rotate matrix
for maximum
similarity

Multidimensional
scaling (MDS)

Figure 4: Schematic overview of our workflow. We use LLMs to create embeddings, subtract an average
embedding of all items from each item embedding and aggregate by dimension through averaging. For both the
embeddings as well as the human data, we compute Cronbach’s alpha and create similarity matrices to compare
both types of data. We run multidimensional scaling, rotate the configurations to maximum similarity and compare
the results both visually as well as quantitatively.

show similar clustering to the MDS solution but
less circular structure since PCA does not guarantee
to preserve distances.
FAC
POD
POR

COI

SEP
SES

AC

COR
BED

HUM
HE
ST

SDT

SDA

TR
BEC
UNN
UNC
UNT

Figure 5: Replacing MDS with PCA. We plot the first
two dimensions found through PCA with the embeddings. We see similar clustering as compared to the
MDS configuration with less overall circular structure.

ED1

0.88***

0.05

ED2

0.05

0.82***

SD1

SD2

Figure 6: Congruence coefficients used to measure the similarity between our two MDS configurations. Labels refer to Embeddings from linq and human
rater judgments from Schwartz (Schwartz and Cieciuch,
2022).

A.5

Congruence coefficients

Congruence coefficients are computed for each of
the two dimensions after Procrustes transformation
of the embeddings configuration. There is no strict
standard, but according to typical interpretations,
values in the range of 0.85-0.94 between two configurations indicate fair similarity (Lorenzo-Seva
and Ten Berge, 2006). To test significance, we create pairs of 1000 random vectors, use Procrustes
transformation to maximize their similarity and
compute cosine similarity. We repeat this procedure 1000 times and find p < 0.001 for the cosine similarities we report over all runs, indicating
that they are significantly different from random
baselines and cannot be explained as artifacts of
Procrustes transformation.
Table 3 presents these scores for all five models
tested. For matching dimensions (SD1_ED1 and
SD2_ED2), higher congruence coefficients indicate better alignment with the human-derived structure. For non-matching dimensions (SD1_ED2
and SD2_ED1), lower values indicate proper orthogonality. Consistent with our other evaluation
measures in the main text such as Cronbach’s Alpha, linq achieves the strongest performance with
congruence scores of 0.88 and 0.82 for the two
matching dimensions, substantially outperforming
other approaches. Gemini also performs quite well,
while the other models show weaker congruence.
A.6

Effect of Questionnaire Embedding
Subtraction

Figure 7, from left to right, shows visually that with
SQuID we achieve negative correlations in the itemitem matrix (dimensions sorted alphabetically).

5751

17
32
48
11
25
47
19
27
55
04
22
51
15
31
42
09
24
49
03
36
46
07
38
54
06
29
41
12
20
44
13
26
53
02
35
50
16
30
56
01
23
39
10
28
43
18
33
40
05
37
52
08
21
45
14
34
57

17
32
48
11
25
47
19
27
55
04
22
51
15
31
42
09
24
49
03
36
46
07
38
54
06
29
41
12
20
44
13
26
53
02
35
50
16
30
56
01
23
39
10
28
43
18
33
40
05
37
52
08
21
45
14
34
57
17
32
48
11
25
47
19
27
55
04
22
51
15
31
42
09
24
49
03
36
46
07
38
54
06
29
41
12
20
44
13
26
53
02
35
50
16
30
56
01
23
39
10
28
43
18
33
40
05
37
52
08
21
45
14
34
57

1

Achievement
Achievement
Benevolence−Care
Benevolence−Care
Benevolence−Dependability
Benevolence−Dependability
Conformity−Interpersonal
Conformity−Interpersonal
Conformity−Rules
Conformity−Rules
Face
Face
Hedonism
Hedonism
Humiltiy
Humiltiy
Power Dominance
Dominance
Power

0.97
0.94
0.91
0.87
0.84

Power
Power Resources
Resources
Security Personal
Personal
Security
Security
Security Societal
Societal
Self−direction
Self−direction Action
Action
Self−direction
Self−direction Thought
Thought
Stimulation
Stimulation
Tradition
Tradition
Universalism−Concern
Universalism−Concern
Universalism−Nature
Universalism−Nature
Universalism−Tolerance
Universalism−Tolerance

0.81
0.78
0.75
0.72
0.69

17
32
48
11
25
47
19
27
55
04
22
51
15
31
42
09
24
49
03
36
46
07
38
54
06
29
41
12
20
44
13
26
53
02
35
50
16
30
56
01
23
39
10
28
43
18
33
40
05
37
52
08
21
45
14
34
57

Achievement
Achievement
Benevolence−Care
Benevolence−Care
Benevolence−Dependability
Benevolence−Dependability
Conformity−Interpersonal
Conformity−Interpersonal
Conformity−Rules
Conformity−Rules
Face
Face
Hedonism
Hedonism
Humiltiy
Humiltiy
Power Dominance
Dominance
Power
Power Resources
Resources
Power
Security
Security Personal
Personal
Security
Security Societal
Societal
Self−direction Action
Action
Self−direction
Self−direction Thought
Thought
Self−direction
Stimulation
Stimulation
Tradition
Tradition
Universalism−Concern
Universalism−Concern
Universalism−Nature
Universalism−Nature
Universalism−Tolerance
Universalism−Tolerance

1
0.87
0.74
0.61
0.48
0.35
0.22
0.1
−0.03
−0.16
−0.29

Figure 7: Effect of questionnaire embedding subtraction on the item similarity matrix. Left hand figure shows
the raw embeddings, right hand figure the SQuID treated embeddings. By using SQuID to normalize for common
standard features of natural language use, negative correlations appear.

gemini
jina
kalm
linq
mpnet

SD1
ED1

SD1
ED2

SD2
ED1

SD2
ED2

0.72
0.37
0.61
0.88
0.53

0.05
0.24
0.13
0.05
0.29

0.05
0.26
0.14
0.05
0.31

0.78
0.78
0.57
0.82
0.26

A.7

For all models that allow to include a prompt, we
use the following wording taken exactly as-is from
the specification of the English version of the PVQRR: "Here we briefly describe different people.
Please read each description and think about how
much that person is or is not like you. Put an X
in the box to the right that shows how much the
person described is like you."

AC
BEC
BED
COI
COR
FAC
HE
HUM
POD
POR
SDA
SDT
SEP
SES
ST
TR
UNC
UNN
UNT

Table 3: Factor congruence scores with human rater
judgments for all models. For matching dimensions
(SD1_ED1 and SD2_ED2) higher is better. For differing
dimensions (SD1_ED2 and SD2_ED1) lower is better.

AC
BEC
BED
COI
COR
FAC
HE
HUM
POD
POR
SDA
SDT
SEP
SES
ST
TR
UNC
UNN
UNT

Prompt

0.63
0.54
0.45
0.36
0.27
0.18
0.09
0
−0.09
−0.18
−0.27

Figure 8: Similarity matrix of SQuID treated embeddings averaged by dimension. We compute correlation
coefficients between SQuID treated embeddings that are
averaged by dimension. We don’t show the diagonal of
1s to better allow to observe correlation ranges.

5752

