arXiv:2603.28643v1 [cs.AI] 30 Mar 2026

The Ultimate Tutorial for AI-driven Scale Development
in Generative Psychometrics: Releasing AIGENIE from
its Bottle
Lara Russell-Lasalandra,*† Hudson Golino,*† Luis Garrido,*‡ and Alexander Christensen*¶
†Department of Psychology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22903, USA
‡Department of Psychology, Pontificia Universidad Madre y Maestra, Dominican Republic
¶Department of Psychology, Vanderbilt University, USA
*Corresponding author. Email: LLR7CB@Virginia.Edu; hfg9s@virginia.edu; luisgarrido@pucmm.edu.do; alexander.christensen@
vanderbilt.edu

Abstract
Psychological scale development has traditionally required extensive expert involvement, iterative revision, and large-scale pilot testing before psychometric evaluation can begin. The AIGENIE R package implements the AI-GENIE framework (Automatic Item Generation with Network-Integrated Evaluation),
which integrates large language model (LLM) text generation with network psychometric methods to
automate the early stages of this process. The package generates candidate item pools using LLMs, transforms them into high-dimensional embeddings, and applies a multi-step reduction pipeline— Exploratory
Graph Analysis (EGA), Unique Variable Analysis (UVA), and bootstrap EGA— to produce structurally
validated item pools entirely in silico. This tutorial introduces the package across six parts: installation
and setup, understanding Application Programming Interfaces (APIs), text generation, item generation,
the AIGENIE function, and the GENIE function. Two running examples illustrate the package’s use: the
Big Five personality model (a well-established construct) and AI Anxiety (an emerging construct). The
package supports multiple LLM providers (OpenAI, Anthropic, Groq, HuggingFace, and local models),
offers a fully offline mode with no external API calls, and provides the GENIE() function for researchers
who wish to apply the psychometric reduction pipeline to existing item pools regardless of their origin.
The AIGENIE package is freely available on R-universe at https://laralee.r-universe.dev/AIGENIE.
Keywords: AIGENIE, Generative Psychometrics, tutorial, LLMs, AI, EGA, UVA, R package

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have become invaluable tools for scale development. Modern LLMs
can generate extremely high-quality text Chakrabarty and Dhillon, 2026; Tengler and Brandhofer,
2025, and crucially, today’s models function as powerful, expert-level writing tools straight out of
the box. In other words, they are powerful enough to be used as-is without fine-tuning or retraining
Carlini et al., 2021. Text generation, however, is only one piece of the puzzle. Encoder LLMs are
also extremely powerful tools for psychometric applications Asudani et al., 2023; Tao et al., 2025,
translating the context and meaning of human language into numeric, computer-readable vectors
Vaswani et al., 2017. Given the considerable cost of traditional scale development (see Boateng et
al. Boateng et al., 2018 & Clark and Watson Clark and Watson, 2016), researchers have begun

2

Lara Russell-Lasalandra

leveraging LLMs to streamline this process. A growing body of literature demonstrates that LLMgenerated items can meet the same quality benchmarks expected of expert-authored items Götz
et al., 2024; Hommel et al., 2022; Keane and McNaughton, 2026; Shin et al., 2025, and in some
cases even surpass them Martin Kowal et al., 2025.
The present paper details how scale developers and methodologists can harness text generation models, embedding models, or both to accelerate scale development using an R package called
AIGENIE (Automatic Item Generation with Network-Integrated Evaluation Russell-Lasalandra et al.,
2024). AIGENIE is free for non-commercial purposes, completely open-source, and available on
R-universe at https://laralee.r-universe.dev/AIGENIE.
This package serves an emerging research domain called Generative Psychometrics Garrido
et al., 2025; Russell-Lasalandra et al., 2024; Russell-Lasalandra and Golino, 2026, in which language
itself is treated as a resource that can be evaluated and assessed algorithmically. For example, Garrido et al. Garrido et al., 2025 used LLM-generated item pools and their embeddings to compare
Principal Component Analysis (PCA Pearson, 1901) with network-based methods for recovering dimensional structure, demonstrating that psychometric questions can be investigated entirely
through generated text without collecting human responses, and demonstrating the superiority of
Exploratory Graph Analysis (EGA H. F. Golino and Epskamp, 2017) with item filtering RussellLasalandra et al., 2024 when compared to PCA. In AIGENIE, item content produced by LLMs (or
by humans) is subjected to rigorous quantitative evaluation prior to any human data collection,
enabling the development and structural validation of entire scales in silico. When the in silico
structural organization of items is compared to the structural organization of variables obtained
from nationally representative samples, the best-performing LLM models achieve a perfect match
Russell-Lasalandra et al., 2024. That is, in silico structural validity can be equivalent to the structural validity recovered from human response data. This approach substantially reduces the resource
barriers that have long characterized measurement development.
The AIGENIE methodology combines optional item generation with network psychometric
techniques for structural validation. The package uses LLMs to generate large candidate item pools
(or accepts an existing pool of human-authored items), embeds them as high-dimensional vectors
via LLM embeddings, and then applies a multi-step psychometric pipeline to identify and remove
redundant or unstable items. This pipeline includes Exploratory Graph Analysis (EGA H. F. Golino
and Epskamp, 2017) for estimating dimensionality, Unique Variable Analysis (UVA Christensen et
al., 2023) for detecting item redundancy, and bootstrap EGA (bootEGA Christensen and Golino,
2021) for evaluating the stability of items and dimensions within the EGA framework. The resulting
item pool is a concise, structurally validated set ready for empirical testing. The efficacy of AIGENIE
has been demonstrated through multiple large-scale Monte Carlo simulations across several LLMs
and temperature settings, with results showing consistent improvements in structural validity across
all conditions Russell-Lasalandra et al., 2024; Russell-Lasalandra and Golino, 2026.
The six steps of the AI-GENIE pipeline are as follows (see Figure 1):
• Step 0: Generate or Write Your Initial Item Pool. The item reduction process must begin with a sizable item pool. These initial items can either be generated seamlessly within the
package using an LLM or directly supplied by the user.
• Step 1: Embed items. Each item is transformed into a high-dimensional numeric vector (an
embedding) using an encoder LLM.
• Step 2: Assess the initial item pool. An EGA model is run on the initial item pool to estimate
its dimensional structure before any reduction takes place. The detected communities (clusters
of items) are compared to the known, intended structure using Normalized Mutual Information
(NMI Danon et al., 2005). NMI can be thought of as an accuracy metric; in AIGENIE, NMI
is displayed as a percentage value on a scale from 0–100%, where 0% indicates complete dissimilarity and 100% demonstrates perfect community detection. Higher NMI values indicate

3

Figure 1. The six steps of the AIGENIE item pool reduction pipeline. Step 0 (which occurs before item reduction) is
obtain the initial item pool (either by generating items using an LLM or manually writing them). Step 1 is generate the
item embeddings using an LLM. Steps 2–6 involve using network psychometric techniques to whittle down the item pool
algorithmically.

4

Lara Russell-Lasalandra
that the clusters within the EGA network better match the known item communities. This step
establishes a baseline measure of structural validity.
• Step 3: Remove redundant items. UVA is used iteratively to detect and remove items with
excessive semantic overlap. UVA identifies redundant item pairs or sets based on weighted topological overlap (wTO Zhang, Horvath, et al., 2005) within the network, retaining only the most
unique representative from each redundant cluster. This step repeats until no further redundancies are found.
• Step 4: Select sparse or full embeddings. An EGA model is run on the full embedding matrix
and a sparsified version of the matrix (in which only the most informative embedding dimensions
are retained). The embedding type that corresponds to the EGA network with the best NMI is
retained for all subsequent steps.
• Step 5: Find the most stable items. BootEGA is used to assess the structural stability of each
item. In this step, 100 new embedding matrices are generated by drawing from a multivariate
normal distribution parameterized by the original embedding matrix, and then EGA is applied
to each one. If an item is consistently assigned to the same dimension across the 100 resamples,
it is considered stable; items that frequently shift between communities are considered unstable
and removed. This step repeats until all remaining items demonstrate high stability.
• Step 6: Final pool is ready for review. A final EGA model is run on the reduced item pool. A
final NMI is calculated to assess the quality of the community detection after item pool reduction.
This final NMI can be compared to that of the baseline.

The AIGENIE R package is an open-source toolkit that integrates artificial intelligence and network psychometrics. By automating labor-intensive stages of scale development such as item writing, redundancy pruning, and structural validation, the package reduces the time and financial burden of creating new measurement tools. Users can build a scale from scratch or refine an existing
item pool, offering a flexible entry point into the emerging field of Generative Psychometrics. The
tutorial that follows is intended to make every step of this process accessible, regardless of the reader’s
prior experience with LLMs or network psychometric analysis.

2. Tutorial Overview
The present tutorial provides a comprehensive, step-by-step guide to using the AIGENIE R package.
This tutorial is organized into six parts that progressively introduce the package’s capabilities:
• Installation and Setup covers the package installation from R-universe, Python environment
configuration, and management of API-based (recommended for most researchers) and local
LLMs.
• Understanding APIs (or Application Programming Interface) details the use of APIs to remotely
access very powerful LLMs to generate items and embeddings.
• Text Generation introduces the text generation capabilities of the package through the chat()
function, which allow users to interact with LLMs directly from R. Additionally, this section
covers hyperparameter tuning and defining system roles.
• Item Generation demonstrates standalone item generation using the AIGENIE() function’s
items.only mode, which generates items without running the reduction pipeline. This section details the difference between the recommended “in-built” prompt and the ability to write
custom prompts.
• The AIGENIE() Function walks through the complete AIGENIE pipeline from start to finish,
first with a simple Big Five personality John and Srivastava, 1999 example and then with a novel,
more extended AI Anxiety construct (AIA Wang and Wang, 2022) demonstration.
• The GENIE() Function provides users with detailed examples on how they can apply only the
psychometric evaluation and reduction pipeline to user-supplied item pools. This capability is

5
for researchers who already have a large set of items that need to be checked for redundancy
and structurally validated.
Throughout this tutorial, two running examples are used. The first is the well-established Big
Five personality model John and Srivastava, 1999 to illustrate basic functionality, as many readers
will have familiarity with this personality framework. The second is AI Anxiety (AIA) to illustrate
the package’s utility for developing scales for novel or underrepresented constructs. While AIA has
received some growing research attention Güven et al., 2024; Li and Huang, 2020; X. Liu and Liu,
2025; Wang and Wang, 2022, it nonetheless lacks the robust literature presence of the “Big Five.” In
other words, this construct will likely be poorly represented in, or entirely absent from, the training
data of many LLMs.

3. Installation and Setup
Setting up the AIGENIE package requires several steps: installing the package and its R dependencies, configuring the Python backend (which the package uses to communicate with LLMs), and
installing support for fully local models (if your machine is powerful and has enough compute to run
LLMs, which is not necessary to use the package). Although AIGENIE is an R package, it relies on
Python in the background to communicate with LLMs; many of the software libraries used to call
LLM APIs and run local models (e.g., the llama-cpp-python inference engine) are developed and
maintained primarily in the Python. AIGENIE uses the reticulate R package Ushey et al., 2026
to call Python functions directly from R, giving users access to the full capabilities of these libraries
without ever needing to write or see Python code. To be clear, AIGENIE offers a seamless, entirely Rnative experience. It does, however, leverage the mature Python infrastructure that underlies much
of the available modern LLM tooling.
Note that, for this section, there are platform-specific instructions for macOS/Linux and Windows.
3.1 Setup the Python Virtual Environment
AIGENIE communicates with LLMs through a Python backend. This Python environment is accessed seamlessly from R via the reticulate package Ushey et al., 2026. To manage the Python
virtual environment, the package uses uv Astral, 2024, a fast, Rust-based utility that the reticulate
ecosystem relies on to create virtual environments. Once the uv utility is successfully installed, close
R (if running) and fully restart your machine.
3.1.1 MacOS/Linux Users
MacOS users need Apple’s Command Line Tools to compile certain dependencies (e.g., uv utility).
If running macOS (not Linux), open the Terminal app and run the following command:
xcode − s e l e c t −− i n s t a l l
Note that Linux users should skip this particular command, as the necessary build tools are typically
pre-installed or available through the system package manager.
If already installed, a message beginning with Command line tools are already installed will appear.
Otherwise, a different dialog will appear prompting you to install the tools. Follow the on-screen
instructions.
Next, install the uv utility on your system. In the Terminal, run the following command:
c u r l − L s S f h t t p s : / / a s t r a l . s h / uv / i n s t a l l . s h | s h
If successful, you should see a message ending in everything’s installed! It should not say permission
denied anywhere in the output.
If you see a permission error, run the following commands in your Terminal:

6

Lara Russell-Lasalandra

echo 'export PATH="$HOME/.local/bin:$PATH"' >> ~/.zshrc
source ~/.zshrc
Then, retry the curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh command.

3.1.2 Windows Users
If on a Windows computer, you will need to open the pre-installed PowerShell application to install
uv. In a PowerShell window, run the following command:
irm h t t p s : / / a s t r a l . s h / uv / i n s t a l l . p s 1 | i e x
If successful, you should see a message ending in everything’s installed! For further troubleshooting,
see the uv installation documentation.

3.2 Install Package and Package Dependencies
Before downloading the AIGENIE package, all users should close R (if running) and fully restart
their computer to ensure that R can locate the uv installation.
We recommend installing all package dependencies explicitly before installing AIGENIE itself.
In an R script, run the following lines of code:
install.packages("reticulate")
install.packages("ggplot2")
install.packages("igraph")
install.packages("patchwork")
install.packages("tm")
install.packages("R.utils")
install.packages("jsonlite")
install.packages("EGAnet")
With the dependencies and uv utility in place, you can install the AIGENIE package. The package
is available on R-universe, which provides pre-built binaries for all major operating systems. To grab
the package from the R-universe, run the following:

# Install AIGENIE from R-universe
install.packages(
"AIGENIE",
repos = c("https://laralee.r-universe.dev",
"https://cloud.r-project.org")
)
3.3 Confirm UV Installation
Once AIGENIE is installed, you can load the library and confirm the status of your uv installation:
library(AIGENIE)
check_installation <- python_env_info()
check_installation[["uv_available"]] # This should be TRUE
If uv_available returns FALSE despite a successful installation, R may not be able to find uv
on your system’s PATH.
If running macOS, open the Terminal and run the following:

PATH="/usr/local/bin:/usr/bin:/bin:/usr/sbin:/sbin:$HOME/.local/bin:
$HOME/.cargo/bin:$PATH"

7
If running Windows, open PowerShell and execute this command (replace <you> with your
computer Admin username):

[Environment]::SetEnvironmentVariable("PATH", $env:PATH + ";C:\Users\
<you>\.local\bin", "User")
After applying either PATH fix, you must close your R script and restart your machine (not
just restart the R session) for the changes to take effect.

3.3.1 Python Environment Setup
The first time you call any AIGENIE function that requires Python, the package will automatically
create a dedicated Python virtual environment and install the necessary dependencies. This process
typically takes 2–3 minutes on a standard internet connection and only needs to happen once. To
setup the environment explicitly, run the ensure_aigenie_python() function. You can also use
this function to customize the installation, if necessary. To reinstall the Python environment from
scratch if you suspect something is awry, use the reinstall_python_env() function.
3.4 (Optionally) Install Local Model Support
If running LLMs on your own machine instead of relying on API service providers, you must install
additional local model support. This support is required for the local_AIGENIE(), local_GENIE(),
and local_chat() functions.
However, running models locally is neither necessary nor recommended for most users. Remotely accessing LLMs from providers like OpenAI and Anthropic will ensure access to frontier
models that are substantially more powerful than the ones that can feasibly run on a personal computer. Models that run comfortably on typical machines (typically 7–13 billion parameters) are
considerably less capable, and their generated items will generally be of lower quality. Running
larger, more capable models locally (e.g., 70 billion parameters or above) demands significant computational resources (e.g., a high-end GPU). Local models are best suited for situations where data
privacy requirements prohibit sending item content to external servers.
On macOS and Linux, local model support can be installed directly from within R by running
the install_local_llm_support() function. For Apple Silicon Macs, this function automatically compiles llama-cpp-python with Metal acceleration for GPU-accelerated inference. For
users with NVIDIA GPUs, additionally run install_gpu_support() to install CUDA-enabled
PyTorch for accelerated embedding generation. Windows users need one prerequisite before this
function will work: the Visual Studio C++ Build Tools from Microsoft.
With local support installed, you can download GGUF-format models from HuggingFace using
the get_local_llm() function. For example, to download the Mistral 7B Instruct model capable
of text generation, run the following lines of code
# The function returns the path where the model was saved
model_path <- get_local_llm(
repo_id = "TheBloke/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2-GGUF",
filename = "mistral-7b-instruct-v0.2.Q4_K_M.gguf"
)

The message model downloaded successfully will appear in the console to indicate that the
model has been downloaded to your machine. You can also verify the install by running check_local_llm_se

8

Lara Russell-Lasalandra

4. Understanding APIs
An Application Programming Interface (API) is a set of protocols that allow machines to communicate (see Auger et al. Auger and Saroyan, 2024). When AIGENIE generates items or embeddings
using a cloud-based model, it does so by sending a request to the model provider’s API. For example,
AIGENIE could ask OpenAI’s servers to run GPT-4o on a given prompt. Then, the API returns the
model output to your computer. The user never interacts with the API directly; the package handles
all communication implicitly behind the scenes.
To authenticate these requests, API providers require an API key: a unique string of characters
that functions simultaneously as a password and an ID. When AIGENIE sends a request to, say,
OpenAI’s servers, it includes your API key so that the server can verify your identity, check that
you have permission to use the requested model, and log the usage for billing purposes.
4.1 Best Practices for Using API Keys
There are several important practices to keep in mind when working with API keys.
1. Save your key immediately since providers will only display your key once. If you navigate
away without copying it, you will need to generate a new one.
2. If you lose your key or suspect it may have been stolen, you can easily create a new key. Just
remember to revoke (delete) your old key.
3. Never share your key or include it in code that others can see (e.g., public GitHub repositories). Anyone with your key can make requests that will be billed to your account.
4. Set a spending limit if possible. A spending cap protects against unexpected charges in the event
that a key is compromised.
5. Be aware of rate limits. Each provider imposes limits on how frequently you can send requests
within a given time window, which is tied to your API key. If you exceed these limits, the API
will temporarily reject your requests.
6. Note that API usage is tracked in tokens, not words or characters. A token is a short word
or word fragment. As a rule of thumb, one token is equivalent to roughly three-quarters of a
word OpenAI, 2024b. So, one million tokens is equivalent to about 750,000 words. Providers
typically charge separately for input tokens (the prompt you send) and output tokens (the text
the model generates), with output tokens being priced higher.

4.2 Supported API Providers
The AIGENIE package supports API keys from five providers.
• OpenAI provides access to the GPT-family models (e.g., GPT-4o, GPT-5.1) for text generation.
OpenAI also has excellent embedding models (recommended). The default embedding model
in the package is their text-embedding-3-small model. A valid payment method is required
to use an OpenAI API key, though costs for typical AIGENIE usage are extremely minimal (think
cents, not dollars).
• Anthropic provides access to the Claude-family models for text generation. Anthropic requires
that users prepay for API credits (minimum $5). By default, Anthropic will not overcharge you—
once your prepaid credits are exhausted, requests will stop until you purchase more. However,
$5 should be more than plenty for typical AIGENIE usage.
• Groq provides access to several open-source models (e.g., Llama, Mixtral, Gemma) for text generation. Groq created the Language Processing Unit (LPU Groq, n.d.), which is a hardware
technology that enables extremely fast text generation. In fact, text generation is so efficient
that low to moderate usage is completely free.

9
• HuggingFace is an open-source repository hosting thousands of LLMs for text generation and
embedding. On HuggingFace, API Keys are called tokens (not to be confused with the tokens
that represent small words or word fragments).
• Jina AI provides access to open-source embedding models. The free tier covers the first 10
million tokens.

4.3 Discovering Available Models
To see which models you have access to based on your API keys, use the list_available_models()
function. For example, say you have valid OpenAI, Groq, and Anthropic API keys. The following
code chunk could be used to determine which models your keys give you access to:
# List all available models across all providers
list_available_models(
openai.API = "your-key", # ADD A VALID KEY!
groq.API = "your-key", # ADD A VALID KEY!
anthropic.API = "your-key" # ADD A VALID KEY!
)
# Filter by provider
list_available_models(provider = "groq", # shows only Groq models
groq.API = groq.API)
# Filter by type (text generation models vs. embedding models)
list_available_models(type = "chat", # text models available
openai.API = openai.API,
groq.API = groq.API,
anthropic.API = anthropic.API)
list_available_models(type = "embedding", # embedding models available
openai.API = openai.API,
groq.API = groq.API,
anthropic.API = anthropic.API)
5. Text Generation
Before diving into how to run the reduction pipeline on AI-generated (or human-written) items,
we will first outline simple text generation. The chat() functions provide a straightforward interface for sending prompts to language models and receiving responses. These functions are useful for
exploratory work or prompt testing. Throughout this section, the chat() function is used; however, the local_chat() could just as easily been used to demonstrate the same ideas with a locally
installed model.
As a simple example, let’s say we wanted to see what kind of items a an LLM would produce
given minimal instructions to establish a sort of baseline. More specifically, we want the model
generate items that target conscientiousness from the Big Five model of personality. A bare-bones
command might be "generate 5 items measuring conscientiousness for a personality scale." The following
code chunk and associated output shows GPT-4o’s response to this prompt:
# Basic usage with OpenAI
response <- chat(
prompts = "Generate 5 items measuring
conscientiousness for a personality scale.",

10

)

Lara Russell-Lasalandra

model = "gpt-4o",
openai.API = "REDACTED" # the API key was removed

# See the response
response$response
[1] To measure conscientiousness on a personality scale , you
might consider items that assess traits such as organization ,
dependability , diligence , and attention to detail . Here are
five example items :\ n \ n1 . I plan my tasks carefully and
stick to my schedule to ensure everything gets done on time .
\ n2 . I pay close attention to details and make few mistakes
in my work .\ n3 . I am always prepared and rarely find myself
scrambling at the last minute .\ n4 . I follow through on my
commitments and can be relied upon to meet deadlines .\ n5 .
I keep my personal and work spaces organized and tidy .
\ n \ nEach item can be rated using a Likert scale , such as 1
( Strongly Disagree ) to 5 ( Strongly Agree ) , to assess the
level of cons cientiousness in individuals .

5.1 Top p and Temperature
Two parameters that appear throughout the package— temperature and top p— influence how
an LLM selects its next token during text generation. They directly affect the diversity and creativity of the items the model produces. In AIGENIE, both parameters default to 1.0, meaning no
additional constraints are imposed beyond the model’s own learned distribution. In this tutorial,
we will demonstrate how output is affected by changing both the temperature and top p from their
defaults. However, whenever a change is made to one of the two parameters, the other is left unchanged. In practice, it is common to adjust one parameter while leaving the other at its default
rather than tuning both simultaneously.OpenAI, 2024a
5.1.1 Temperature
LLMs generate text one token at a time. At each step, the model assigns a probability to every possible next token in its vocabulary. A model’s temperature value rescales this probability distribution
before a token is sampled. Most models have a default temperature of 1.0; at this temperature, the
model samples directly from its learned probabilities. Lowering the temperature sharpens the distribution, making high-probability tokens even more likely to be chosen. Doing so produces more
predictable, repetitive, and less complex output. Raising the temperature flattens the distribution,
giving lower-probability tokens a better chance of being selected and producing more varied (but
potentially less coherent) output.
The effect of temperature on output quality (if there even is an effect Patel et al., 2024) is not
straight forward and depends on the context as well as the specific model Renze, 2024; Zhu et
al., 2024. Temperature can be though of as a "creativity knob," where tasks that require higher
creativity may benefit from higher temperatures (though, even this relationship to creativity is not
always a given Peeperkorn et al., 2024). For item generation within AIGENIE, simulation results
Russell-Lasalandra and Golino, 2026 showed that AI-GENIE reliably improved structural validity
across all temperature settings (0.5, 1.0, and 1.5), though the relationship between temperature and
item quality was not always straightforward and depended on the model used.
In the example above where GPT-4o was asked to generate 5 items measuring conscientiousness for a
personality scale, the temperature was left at the default of 1. However, we can modify the optional

11

temperature argument to see how temperature tuning influences the output. Let’s increase the
temperature to 1.5 and observe its effects:
# Generate a response to the question at a higher temperature
response_high_temp <- chat(
prompts = "Generate 5 items measuring conscientiousness
for a personality scale.",
model = "gpt-4o",
openai.API = "REDACTED", # API key removed
temperature = 1.5 # Increased to a HIGHER temp
)
# View the results
response_high_temp$response
[1] Sure , here are five items designed to measure
consc ientious ness for a personality scale :\ n \ n1 .
* * Dutifulness * * \ n
- I consistently meet my obligations
even if they feel inconvenient or challenging .\ n \ n2 .
* * Orderliness * * \ n
- I prefer to have a well organized environment and consistently maintain order
in my daily tasks and workspace .\ n \ n3 . * * Dependability * *
\n
- People can count on me to follow through on
commitments without needing reminders .\ n \ n4 . * * Attention
to Detail * * \ n
- I pay close attention to detail and
take care to ensure accuracy in everything I do .\ n \ n5 .
* * Self - Discipline * * \ n
- I ensure to finish tasks I
start , even if they are dull , rather than allowing
distractions to undermine my productivity . \ n \ nThese
items assess various aspects of conscientiousness , such
as dutifulness , orderliness , dependability ,
meticulousness , and self - discipline .

In general, the items in the output produced by the higher temperature GPT-4o model are more
lexically complex and verbose than the items in the output using the default model. For example, the
item I keep my personal and work spaces organized and tidy came from the default temperature model,
whereas the item I prefer to have a well-organized environment and consistently maintain order in my daily
tasks and workspace came from the higher-temperature model.
We can also decrease the temperature argument to a value below 1 to investigate how a lower
temperature setting may impact the output:

# Generate a response to the question at a lower temperature
response_low_temp <- chat(
prompts = "Generate 5 items measuring conscientiousness
for a personality scale.",
model = "gpt-4o",
openai.API = "REDACTED", # API key removed
temperature = 0.5 # Decreased to a LOWER temp
)
# View the results
response_low_temp$response

12

Lara Russell-Lasalandra

[1] Certainly ! Here are five items designed to measure
consc ientious ness for a personality scale :\ n \ n1 . * * I a
m meticulous and pay attention to details in my work
and personal tasks . * * \ n
- Strongly Disagree \ n
Disagree \ n
- Neutral \ n
- Agree \ n
- Strongly Agree
\ n \ n2 . * * I often plan my activities in advance and follow
a structured schedule . * * \ n
- Strongly Disagree \ n
Disagree \ n
- Neutral \ n
- Agree \ n
- Strongly Agree
\ n \ n3 . * * I am reliable and can be counted on to fulfill
my commitments and responsibilities . * * \ n
- Strongly
Disagree \ n
- Disagree \ n
- Neutral \ n
- Agree \ n
Strongly Agree \ n \ n4 . * * I prefer to keep my living and
working spaces organized and tidy . * * \ n
- Strongly
Disagree \ n
- Disagree \ n
- Neutral \ n
- Agree \ n
- Strongly Agree \ n \ n5 . * * I am persistent and work
diligently to achieve my goals , even when faced with
obstacles . * * \ n
- Strongly Disagree \ n
- Disagree \ n
- Neutral \ n
- Agree \ n
- Strongly Agree \ n \ nThese
items are designed to assess various aspects of
conscientiousness , such as attention to detail ,
organization , reliability , planning , and persistence .

In this particular example, the items from the lower temperature model are fairly similar to that
of the default temperature model. In fact, the item I prefer to keep my living and working spaces organized
and tidy from the lower-temperature model is almost identical to the item I keep my personal and work
spaces organized and tidy from the default temperature model.
However, the effects of temperature tuning may not be obvious across a single instance; increasing the reps argument (which controls the number of times the model responds to the provided
prompt) from the default of 1 to 10 or 50 might reveal some systematic differences that are not immediately obvious in a single output. Although, model hyperparameter tuning is a far less important
than model selection Evstafev, 2025. That is, determining whether GPT-4o is the best LLM for the
task is paramount; then, determining which temperature setting of GPT-4o should be used can be
considered.

5.1.2 Top p
Top p (also called nucleus sampling) simply truncates the next-token probability distribution rather
than rescale it Holtzman et al., 2019. The model considers only the smallest set of tokens whose
cumulative probability exceeds the threshold p, and samples from that subset. For example, a top p
of 0.9 means the model considers only the most probable tokens that together account for 90% of
the probability mass. The remaining 10% of unlikely tokens are completely discarded. A top p
less than the default of 1 restricts the model to a narrower set of high-probability tokens. Thus,
the default setting of AIGENIE includes the LLM’s entire token vocabulary and effectively disables
nucleus sampling.
Consider the same example from above: we want the GPT-4o model to generate items that
target conscientiousness given a bare-bones prompt (i.e., generate 5 items measuring conscientiousness
for a personality scale). Let’s decrease the top p parameter to 0.5:
# Generate a response to the question at a lower top p
response_low_top_p <- chat(
prompts = "Generate 5 items measuring conscientiousness
for a personality scale.",
model = "gpt-4o",

13

)

openai.API = "REDACTED", # API key removed
top.p = 0.5 # Decreased to a LOWER top p value

# View the results
response_low_top_p$response
[1] Certainly ! Here are five items designed to measure
consc ientious ness for a personality scale :\ n \ n1 . * * Task
Completion * * : I always complete my tasks thoroughly and on
time , even when they are challenging or tedious .\ n \ n2 .
* * Organization * * : I keep my workspace and personal areas
organized and tidy , ensuring everything is in its proper
place .\ n \ n3 . * * Attention to Detail * * : I pay close attention
to details and strive for accuracy in everything I do ,
avoiding careless mistakes .\ n \ n4 . * * Dependability * * : Others
can rely on me to fulfill my commitments and responsibilities
consistently .\ n \ n5 . * * Goal - Oriented * * : I set clear goals for
myself and work diligently to achieve them , even when it
requires sustained effort over time .\ n \ nThese items aim to
capture various aspects of conscientiousness , such as
reliability , organization , diligence , and attention to detail .

These items, when compared to those generated with the default top p setting, exhibit a noticeably more uniform sentence structure. Each item begins with an independent clause and ends
with a clarifying subordinate phrase (e.g., I set clear goals for myself and work diligently to achieve them,
even when it requires sustained effort over time). By contrast, when top p was left at the default value
of 1.0, the syntactic structure of the generated items varied more naturally. For instance, the item I
keep my personal and work spaces organized and tidy contains a single verb phrase, whereas I plan my
tasks carefully and stick to my schedule to ensure everything gets done on time chains multiple verb phrases
together.

5.2 Defining a System Role
Until this point in the tutorial, we’ve only experimented with changes to the user prompt. The
user prompt, or the prompt that most people are readily familiar with, is the actual request or instruction. However, another type of input is a system role prompt. A system role is a set of background
instructions that shape how the model behaves Chen et al., 2025. It functions like an identity or
persona that the LLM should embody as it generates the output.
For example, a system role might be something like you are an expert psychometrician and test
developer specializing in personality assessment. This instruction tells the model to approach item generation from the perspective of a domain expert. This primes the model toward domain-consistent
language, professional tone that a generic prompt alone might not elicit A. Liu et al., 2024. Research
on the efficacy of persona prompting has shown that assigning a role to a model can improve the
quality and coherence of its output, particularly for tasks that benefit from domain-specific framing
De Paoli, 2023; Jiang et al., 2024; Kong et al., 2024. However, in some contexts, the benefits tend to
only increase when the assigned role is well-aligned with the task domain Zheng et al., 2024. And,
sometimes, adding a system role may have unforeseen limitations Hu et al., 2026. However, in the
context of item generation, persona prompting will very likely only have a positive or negligible
effect on output.
To add a system role, do the following:
# Define a helpful model persona

14

Lara Russell-Lasalandra

system.role <- "You are an expert psychometrician who
specializes in personality measurement. You know how to
write clear, concise items that are robust."
# Generate a response to the question with a system role
response_system_role <- chat(
prompts = "Generate 5 items measuring conscientiousness
for a personality scale.",
model = "gpt-4o",
openai.API = "REDACTED", # API key removed
system.role = system.role # System role prompt provided
)
# View the results
response_system_role$response
[1] Certainly ! Here are five items designed to measure
consc ientious ness for a personality scale . Please rate
each item on a scale from 1 ( Strongly Disagree ) to 5
( Strongly Agree ):\ n \ n1 . I am meticulous in my approach to
organizing and completing tasks .\ n2 . I plan my activities
in advance to ensure that I meet deadlines consistently .
\ n3 . I pay close attention to details in both my personal
and professional life .\ n4 . I often set goals for myself
and work diligently to achieve them .\ n5 . I hold myself
accountable for completing tasks to the best of my ability .

With a system role, delivers the items directly, using more precise, psychometrically conventional
language (e.g., I am meticulous in my approach to organizing and completing tasks rather than I pay close
attention to details and make few mistakes in my work). The system role shifts the model’s posture from
educator explaining the task to practitioner executing the task, producing output that is closer to the
register expected of a finished assessment instrument.

6. Item Generation
One of the core capabilities of the AIGENIE package is automated item generation. Given a set of
constructs and their attributes, the package prompts an LLM to generate novel candidate items. This
section demonstrates how to generate items without running the full psychometric pipeline, using
the items.only = TRUE flag within either the AIGENIE() or its local equivalent local_AIGENIE()
functions. Generating items in isolation is useful for exploring what the model produces and refining
prompts iteratively.
6.1 The item.attributes Parameter
The single most important parameter in the AIGENIE() function is item.attributes. This parameter is a named list in which each element represents an item type (i.e., a construct or dimension
of interest), and the character vector within each element specifies the attributes. Attributes are the
specific facets, themes, or content areas that the generated items should collectively cover.
Consider the five traits within the "Big Five" personality model John and Srivastava, 1999 (openness to experience, consciousness, extraversion, agreeableness, and neuroticism). Each personality
trait encompasses several behaviors; for example, someone who is exhibits high levels of openness to
experience may be very artistic, but that person could just as easily enjoy philosophical discussion.

15
Being "creative" and "philosophical," therefore, describe two valid manifestations of the same personality trait. Building on this idea of defining trait manifestations for each of the five traits, we can
create the following item.attributes object:

big5_attributes <- list(
openness = c("creative", "perceptual", "curious",
"philosophical"),
conscientiousness = c("organized", "responsible", "disciplined",
"prudent"),
extraversion = c("friendly", "positive", "assertive",
"energetic"),
agreeableness = c("cooperative", "compassionate", "trustworthy",
"humble"),
neuroticism = c("anxious", "depressed", "insecure",
"emotional")
)
Here, the five names of the list (openness, conscientiousness, etc.) are the item types, and the character vectors within each are the attributes. The model will be instructed to generate items that
target each of these attributes, producing items across the full breadth of each construct.
It should be noted that attributes do not need to correspond to formal subscales or established
subdomains. They simply represent the range of content that the items, as a whole, should cover. If a
researcher is developing a unidimensional scales should not think of attributes as separate subscales;
they reflect the distinct thematic facets that a comprehensive set of a given type of item should
span. Including attributes ensures that the LLM does not generate items that cluster around a single
narrow aspect of the construct while neglecting others. In AIGENIE, the model is instructed to
produce items for each attribute, which results in a more content-diverse initial pool.
Additionally, while the attributes within this tutorial are one word, attributes can just as well
be richer, more verbose phrases if prudent. The the number of attributes per item type through
this tutorial are consistent (e.g., there are four attributes per OCEAN personality trait). However,
the number of attributes per item type can vary (e.g., openness could have eight attributes whereas
neuroticism could have only three), so long as there are at least two for any given item type.

6.2 Generating Items within the AIGENIE Function
Generating items using the AIGENIE() or local_AIGENIE() function offers two distinct modes
for how prompts are constructed and sent to the model. The choice between them determines how
much control the user has over the exact wording of the instructions the LLM receives.
6.2.1 The In-Built Prompt
In the built-in prompting mode (the default), the user provides as many descriptive components as
possible and the package automatically assembles them into a complete, well-structured prompt behind the scenes (See Figure 2). These descriptive components are analogous bricks; the AIGENIE()
function arranges, aggregates, and assembles these "bricks" into a stable, coherent "structure." This
"structure" is the primary user prompt passed to the LLM. Using this in-built prompt is recommended for most researchers because it incorporates the prompt engineering strategies shown to
produce high-quality items in simulation studies Russell-Lasalandra et al., 2024, and it avoids the
risk of omitting critical prompt components that can degrade output quality.
The descriptive components (or "bricks") that the user can provide in the built-in prompting
mode are all optional, but users should provide as many as possible. These components are as
follows:

16

Lara Russell-Lasalandra

Figure 2. When using AIGENIE in the in-built prompt mode, the function takes the user-specified components (e.g.,
domain, prompt.notes, item.type.definitions, or scale.title) and uses them to build a strong prompt automatically.

• domain specifies the research domain (e.g., "personality measurement" or "child development").
• scale.title provides the names of the scale being developed.
• audience describes the scale’s intended target population (e.g., "college-educated adults"
or "children with ASD in second grade").
• item.type.definitions is a named list providing a brief definition of each item type, giving
the model substantive context about the construct.
• response.options specifies the intended response options for the items (e.g., c("disagree", "neutral",
• item.examples is a data frame containing high-quality example items to guide the model’s
generation style and format.
• prompt.notes allows the user to append custom instructions to the automatically constructed
prompt without having to write the entire prompt from scratch (e.g., "ensure every item begins
with the stem ’I am someone who’..." or "items should be very brief and contain no words that would
exceed a fifth-grade vocabulary"). That is, the user can inject specific requirements or constraints
while still benefiting from the package’s built-in prompt engineering. If the built-in prompt
handles most of what you need and only a small adjustment is required, prompt.notes is the
right tool for the job.
Previously, we defined the big5_attributes object to demonstrate the item.attributes
parameter. Now that the parameters pertaining to the in-built prompt have been defined, we can
write code to generate items using the AIGENIE() function:

# First.. define the important item.attributes object
big5_attributes <- list(
openness = c("creative", "perceptual", "curious",
"philosophical"),
conscientiousness = c("organized", "responsible", "disciplined",
"prudent"),
extraversion = c("friendly", "positive", "assertive",
"energetic"),

17

)

agreeableness = c("cooperative", "compassionate", "trustworthy",
"humble"),
neuroticism = c("anxious", "depressed", "insecure",
"emotional")

# Generate items using the built-in prompt
items_builtin <- AIGENIE(
item.attributes = big5_attributes, # defined above
openai.API = "REMOVED", # API Key REMOVED
model = "gpt-4o",
# Descriptive components for prompt construction
domain = "personality measurement",
scale.title = "Big Five Personality Inventory",
audience = "college-educated adults in the United States",
item.type.definitions = list(
openness = "Openness reflects intellectual curiosity,
aesthetic sensitivity, and a preference for novelty
and variety.",
conscientiousness = "Conscientiousness reflects a tendency
toward self-discipline, goal-directed behavior, and
organization.",
extraversion = "Extraversion reflects sociability,
assertiveness, and the tendency to seek stimulation
in the company of others.",
agreeableness = "Agreeableness reflects a tendency to be
cooperative, compassionate, and trusting toward
others.",
neuroticism = "Neuroticism reflects emotional instability,
including proneness to anxiety, sadness, and mood
swings."
),
response.options = c("strongly disagree", "disagree",
"neutral", "agree", "strongly agree"),
prompt.notes = "All items should be written as first-person
self-report statements beginning with 'I am someone who'.",
# System role... the model's persona
system.role = "You are an expert psychometrician and test
developer specializing in personality assessment.",

)

target.N = 8, # Generating only 8 items per item type
items.only = TRUE # ONLY generating items in this example

# View the some of the resulting items
items_builtin$statement[1:5]
[1] I am someone who often finds unconventional solutions to

18

Lara Russell-Lasalandra

problems .
[2] I am someone who enjoys engaging in activities that allow
me to express my imaginative ideas .
[3] I am someone who notices details in the environment that
others might overlook .
[4] I am someone who is able to detect subtle differences in
tone and mood during conversations .
[5] I am someone who seeks out new knowledge and experiences
for the sake of learning .

6.2.2 Implicit Prompt Engineering within AIGENIE
The quality of AI-generated items depends heavily on how the LLM is prompted. As explained
above, when no custom prompts are provided, AIGENIE() automatically constructs prompts using
the information supplied through its parameters. Recent simulation work within the AI-GENIE
framework has demonstrated that prompt engineering strategies can substantially influence the
structural validity and redundancy of generated item pools, with effects that scale with model capability Russell-Lasalandra and Golino, 2026. Therefore, this section makes a note of which prompt
engineering strategies are used implicitly when using the in-built prompt.
The default prompt architecture incorporates several prompt engineering best practices:
• System role (persona prompting): A domain-specific expert persona is assigned to the model,
built from the domain, scale.title, and audience parameters.
• Contextual instructions: The prompt includes the construct definition (from item.type.definitions),
the target attributes, and the response format.
• Few-shot examples: If item.examples are provided, they are incorporated to anchor the model’s
output style.
• Adaptive generation: when adaptive = TRUE (the default), previously generated items are appended to the prompt to prevent repetition. A follow-up simulation study Russell-Lasalandra and
Golino, 2026 further demonstrated that the prompt engineering strategy of adaptive prompting Lightman et al., 2023 can meaningfully shape the quality of AI-generated item pools, with
effects that scale with model capability. Adaptive prompting is a prompting strategy where the
LLM is shown a running list of everything it has already produced and explicitly instructed not
to repeat or rephrase any of those earlier items. Typically, LLMs left unconstrained tend to regurgitate the same ideas over and over again. Adaptive prompting counteracts that tendency by
making the model’s output from previous iterations part of its input context.

6.2.3 The Custom Prompt
In the custom prompting mode, the user supplies fully written prompts via the main.prompts
parameter. There must be exactly one prompt per item type. In this mode, the user has complete
control over the exact instructions the model receives. This mode is best suited for researchers who
want to incorporate specific prompt engineering strategies or exercise fine-grained control over
every aspect of how the model is instructed.
However, custom prompting is substantially more demanding than the built-in mode and is
not generally recommended for most users. When the package constructs prompts automatically,
it includes several components that are easy to overlook when writing prompts from scratch. For
instance, prompt-writers must consider clear task framing and communication, the explicit mention
of all the item type’s attributes, decisions on the number of items to generate per model instance, and
diligent outlining of all important context the model needs. Omitting any one of these components
can lead to items that are poorly formatted or off-target at best, and items that are unparseable or
otherwise unusable for reduction analysis at worst. Thus, we recommend that most researchers

19
use the built-in mode and only switch to custom prompting after gaining familiarity with the
package and with prompt engineering more broadly.
For researchers who do choose custom prompting, there are several requirements and best practices to follow. First, main.prompts must be a named list with one prompt per item type, and
the names must match the names in item.attributes exactly. Second, each prompt must explicitly reference all of a given item type’s attributes listed in the corresponding element of
item.attributes. The package uses these attributes to parse and label the returned items; if an
attribute is missing from the prompt, items targeting that facet will not be generated or will it be
labeled correctly. Third, each prompt should be self-contained. The prompt should provide all the
context the model needs for that particular item type, because each prompt is sent to the model
independently.
A well-constructed custom prompt typically includes the following components, in roughly this
order:
• Task context: a good description of what is being generated and why.
• Contextual background: details like a strong definition of the target construct, who the scale
is intended for, and all other pertinent information.
• Explicit generation instructions: the model must know how many items to generate and how
they should be distributed across attributes (this component is mandatory).
• a list of the attributes, named exactly as they appear in item.attributes (this component is
mandatory).
• Quality constraints: these constraints can include instructions to generate novel items, avoid
existing measures, and use a specific item format.
Let’s examine an example of a custom prompt. Recall that the big5_attributes object defined
in previous examples listed attributes for each of the Big Five personality traits (e.g., "curiosity"
and "philosophical" were named for openness where as "friendly" and "positive" were named for
extraversion).
The big5_attributes object was used to generate items using the in-built prompt, and we
will use it again to guide our prompt construction for this custom prompting example. To achieve
the same result using custom prompts, the we must write a complete, self-contained prompt for each
of the five item types. Every prompt must reference all attributes by name exactly as they appear in
big5_attributes. Here’s what these prompts might look like:

# Create the "main.prompts" object
custom_prompts <- list(
openness = "You are generating novel items targeting the Big Five
personality trait openness to experience. Openness to experience
is a personality trait that describes how open-minded, creative,
and imaginative a person is. Generate EXACTLY eight items total
for openness to experience; generate two items per attribute of
openness to experience. These attributes are as follows: 1)
creative, 2) perceptual, 3) curious, and 4) philosophical. Do
NOT add or remove any attributes; use the attributes EXACTLY as
provided. All items should be first-person self-report
statements beginning with 'I am someone who'. Do NOT look for
items that already exist in the literature; all items should
be novel. Don't be afraid to push the bounds of the construct.",
conscientiousness = "You are generating novel items targeting the
Big Five personality trait conscientiousness. Conscientiousness

20

Lara Russell-Lasalandra

is a personality trait that describes one's tendency toward selfdiscipline, goal-directed behavior, and organization. Generate
EXACTLY eight items total for conscientiousness; generate two
items per attribute of conscientiousness. These attributes are as
follows: 1) organized, 2) responsible, 3) disciplined, and 4)
prudent. Do NOT add or remove any attributes; use the attributes
EXACTLY as provided. All items should be first-person self-report
statements beginning with 'I am someone who'. Do NOT look
for items that already exist in the literature; all items should
be novel. Don't be afraid to push the bounds of the construct.",
extraversion = "You are generating novel items targeting the Big
Five personality trait extraversion. Extraversion is a personality
trait that describes people who are more focused on the external
world than their internal experience. Generate EXACTLY eight
items total for extraversion; generate two items per attribute of
extraversion. These attributes are as follows: 1) friendly, 2)
positive, 3) assertive, and 4) energetic. Do NOT add or remove
any attributes; use the attributes EXACTLY as provided. All items
should be first-person self-report statements beginning with 'I
am someone who'. Do NOT look for items that already exist in the
literature; all items should be novel. Don't be afraid to push
the bounds of the construct.",
agreeableness = "You are generating novel items targeting the Big
Five personality trait agreeableness. Agreeableness is
personality trait that describes one's tendency to be
cooperative, compassionate, and trusting toward others. Generate
EXACTLY eight items total for agreeableness; generate two items
per attribute of agreeableness. These attributes are as follows:
1) cooperative, 2) compassionate, 3) trustworthy, and 4) humble.
Do NOT add or remove any attributes; use the attributes EXACTLY
as provided. All items should be first-person self-report
statements beginning with 'I am someone who'. Do NOT look for
items that already exist in the literature; all items should be
novel. Don't be afraid to push the bounds of the construct.",
neuroticism = "You are generating novel items targeting the Big Five
personality trait neuroticism. Neuroticism is a personality trait
that describes one's tendency to experience negative emotions
like anxiety, depression, irritability, anger, and selfconsciousness. Generate EXACTLY eight items total for
neuroticism; generate two items per attribute of neuroticism.
These attributes are as follows: 1) anxious, 2) depressed, 3)
insecure, and 4) emotional. Do NOT add or remove any attributes;
use the attributes EXACTLY as provided. All items should be firstperson self-report statements beginning with 'I am someone who'.
Do NOT look for items that already exist in the literature; all
items should be novel. Don't be afraid to push the bounds of the

21

)

construct."

Notice that each prompt contains task context, construct definitions, attribute lists, quantity
instructions, and quality constraints. Each prompt follows the same general template but must be
individually tailored to the target construct (i.e., item type), and the attributes must be listed by
name exactly as they appear in big5_traits. If even one attribute is misspelled or omitted, the
package will not be able to parse and label the resulting items correctly. Moreover, if the researcher
later decides to change the item stem from "I am someone who" to, say, "I tend to," that change must
be applied manually across all five prompts in the custom mode. In the built-in mode it requires
editing only the single prompt.notes string.
With these prompts drafted, we can call the AIGENIE() function to generate items. Note that
parameters like audience and response.options are not supplied here as they were when using
the in-built prompt (the "bricks" are useless if you already have a sturdy "wall/structure" made):

# Generate items using the custom prompts
items_custom <- AIGENIE(
item.attributes = big5_attributes, # defined previously
openai.API = "REMOVED", # API key removed
model = "gpt-4o",
main.prompts = custom_prompts, # these are the custom prompts

)

# Give the model the same persona as before
system.role = "You are an expert psychometrician and test developer
specializing in personality assessment.",
target.N = 8, # only generate 8 items per item type
items.only = TRUE # only return items... no reduction pipeline

# View the first 5 items generated
items_custom$statement[1:5]
[1] I am someone who finds novel ways to express my thoughts
and ideas .
[2] I am someone who enjoys transforming ordinary objects into
something artistic .
[3] I am someone who notices subtle details in my surroundings
that others might miss .
[4] I am someone who enjoys immersing myself in new sensory
experiences , like tasting unfamiliar foods or listening to
diverse music genres .
[5] I am someone who feels a strong need to investigate and
understand how things work .

7. The AIGENIE Function
The full AI-GENIE pipeline automates the entire workflow from item generation through structural validation. A single call to the AIGENIE() function (or local equivalent local_AIGENIE()
function) generates items, embeds them, estimates the network structure, removes redundant items,
assesses stability, and returns a validated item pool. This section walks through the complete pipeline
using two examples: a simple Big Five demonstration and a more extended AI Anxiety application.

22

Lara Russell-Lasalandra

7.1 Understanding the Output of the AIGENIE Function
This section describes the default output that most researchers will see when they work with
AIGENIE (i.e., the object returned when items.only, embeddings.only, run.overall, keep.org,
and all.together are all set to their default value of FALSE). Variations introduced by each flag
are described at the end of this section.
To better help demonstrate the structure of the output, let’s begin with a focused example generating items for three of the Big Five traits. Note that this code is identical to the example listed under
text generation, but with the items.only flag removed, the target number of items increased to a
more sizable count appropriate for reduction, and the model changed to a more capable one:
# Generate items and run the reduction pipeline
reduction_builtin <- AIGENIE(
item.attributes = big5_attributes, # defined previously
openai.API = "REMOVED", # API Key REMOVED
model = "gpt-5.1", # using a more modern model
# Descriptive components for prompt construction
domain = "personality measurement",
scale.title = "Big Five Personality Inventory",
audience = "college-educated adults in the United States",
item.type.definitions = list(
openness = "Openness reflects intellectual curiosity,
aesthetic sensitivity, and a preference for novelty
and variety.",
conscientiousness = "Conscientiousness reflects a tendency
toward self-discipline, goal-directed behavior, and
organization.",
extraversion = "Extraversion reflects sociability,
assertiveness, and the tendency to seek stimulation
in the company of others.",
agreeableness = "Agreeableness reflects a tendency to be
cooperative, compassionate, and trusting toward
others.",
neuroticism = "Neuroticism reflects emotional instability,
including proneness to anxiety, sadness, and mood
swings."
),
response.options = c("strongly disagree", "disagree",
"neutral", "agree", "strongly agree"),
prompt.notes = "All items should be written as first-person
self-report statements beginning with 'I am someone who'.",
# System role... the model's persona
system.role = "You are an expert psychometrician and test
developer specializing in personality assessment.",
)

target.N = 60, # Generating 60 items per item type

23

7.1.1 Top-Level Structure
The default output is a named list with two top-level elements: item_type_level and overall:
# See the top-level structure of the output
names(reduction_builtin)
[1] item _ type _ level

overall

The item_type_level object is itself a named list containing one element per item type, named
to match item.attributes. In our Big Five example, reduction_builtin$item_type_level
contains five sublists corresponding to each of the five personality traits: openness, conscientiousness,
extraversion, agreeableness, and neuroticism. Each sublist holds the complete set of results
from the reduction pipeline as applied to that item type in isolation.
The overall object is also a named list that aggregates the final items and embeddings across all
item types into a single object. The final items remaining after the reduction analysis for items of all
types are stored as a data frame in the overall object: reduction_builtin$overall$final_items.
The overall object also contains an element called embeddings. The embeddings object is a list
containing the sparsified and the full embedding matrices used in the reduction pipeline.

7.1.2 Results on the Item Type Level
Since items are evaluated in the reduction pipeline completely agnostic of items that are of other
types, separate, independent results are available for each of the item types. In other words, contentiousness items go through the reduction pipeline only with other conscientiousness times, neuroticism items go through the reduction pipeline only with other neuroticism, and so on. Each pertype sublist within reduction_builtin$item_type_level contains thirteen elements. Therefore, in our example, there would be thirteen result elements pertaining to each of the five personality traits. These are the thirteen elements:
# Pick a trait (openness) to see what results are available on the
# item-type level in general
names(reduction_builtin$item_type_level$openness)

[1]
[4]
[7]
[10]
[13]

final _ NMI
UVA
final _ items
start _ N
stability _ plot

initial _ NMI
bootEGA
final _ EGA
final _ N

embeddings
EGA . model _ selected
initial _ EGA
network _ plot

Here is closer look at each of these thirteen elements:
• final_items is the most practically important element. It is a data.frame containing the
items that survived the full reduction pipeline. Its columns are:
– ID: A numeric identifier assigned during generation.
– statement: The item’s actual text (e.g., I often lose myself in creative projects)
– attribute: The attribute the item was generated to reflect (e.g., "creative").
– type: The item type the item belongs to (e.g., "openness").
– EGA_com: The community assignment from the final EGA network.
• start_N records the total number of items generated for this item type. In our example,
reduction_builtin$item_type_level$agreeableness$start_N would return 64. Thus,
there were 64 agreeableness items in the initial item pool before reduction.

24

Lara Russell-Lasalandra

• final_N records the total number of items generated for this item type. In our example,
reduction_builtin$item_type_level$agreeableness$final_N would return 49. Thus,
there were 49 agreeableness items in the final item pool after the reduction analysis.
• initial_NMI is a numeric value reporting the Normalized Mutual Information (NMI) between
the network-detected community structure and the known attribute assignments before any
reduction steps.
• final_NMI is a numeric value reporting the NMI between the network-detected community
structure and the known attribute assignments after all reduction steps.
• UVA is a list containing results from the Unique Variable Analysis (UVA) redundancy reduction
step. UVA identifies pairs or sets of items whose embeddings are so similar that retaining them
all would introduce redundancy. The list contains:
– n_removed is the total number of redundant items removed across all UVA sweeps.
– n_sweeps is the number of iterative passes UVA required before no further redundancies
were detected.
– redundant_pairs is a data.frame logging every redundancy decision. Each row records
the sweep in which the redundancy was detected, the items involved, which item was kept,
and which item or items were removed.
• bootEGA is a list containing results from the bootstrap Exploratory Graph Analysis (bootEGA)
step. After UVA removes semantically redundant items, bootEGA evaluates the structural stability of the remaining items by repeatedly resampling the embedding matrix and estimating
the network structure. Items that frequently change community membership across bootstrap
samples are pruned. The list contains:
– initial_boot is the bootEGA object (from the EGAnet package H. Golino and Christensen,
2025) estimated on the post-UVA item pool, before any stability-based pruning.
– final_boot is the bootEGA object estimated after stability-based pruning.
– n_removed reports the number of items removed due to low structural stability across all
bootEGA stability sweeps.
– items_removed is a data.frame logging the specific items that were identified and pruned
during the stability check.
– initial_boot_with_redundancies is a bootEGA object estimated on the full, pre-UVA
item pool. This object is useful for comparing the stability of the item pool before and after
redundancy reduction.
• EGA.model_selected is a character string indicating which network estimation model was
selected: Triangulated Maximally Filtered Graph (TMFG Massara et al., 2016) or Extended
Bayesian Criterion Graphical Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (EBICglasso
or glasso Foygel and Drton, 2010; Friedman et al., 2008). When EGA.model = NULL (the
default), the package tests both models and selects whichever produces a higher NMI. If the user
specifies a model via the EGA.model parameter, this field simply reflects that choice.
• initial_EGA is an EGA object (from the EGAnet package) representing the network structure
of the item pool before the reduction pipeline.
• final_EGA is an EGA object representing the network structure after the reduction pipeline
• embeddings is a list containing the embedding matrices used in the analysis. The list contains
three elements:
– full is the dense (full) embedding matrix for the final retained items. Rows are embedding
dimensions, columns are items (column names correspond to item IDs).
– sparse is the sparsified embedding matrix for the final retained items. Sparsification zeroes
out values in the middle 95% of the distribution, retaining only the most extreme embedding
entities.

25
– selected names the embedding type (either full or sparse) used in the analysis. The package
tests both and selects whichever yields a higher NMI.
• network_plot stores the ggplotWickham, 2016/patchworkPedersen, 2025 object displaying
a side-by-side comparison of the EGA networks before and after reduction with the initial network on the left and the final network on the right. NMI values are annotated on each panel.
An example of this network plot for agreeableness items is shown in Figure 3.
• stability_plot is a ggplot/patchwork object comparing item stability before (the plot on
the left) and after (the plot on the right) reduction. Item stability refers to how consistently each
item is assigned to the same community across bootstrap samples. Higher stability values (closer
to 1) indicate that an item reliably belongs to its assigned dimension. An example of such a plot
for agreeableness items is shown in Figure 4.

Figure 3. A plot showing the EGA network before item reduction (on the left) compared to the network after item reduction
(on the right) for Agreeableness items.

26
Lara Russell-Lasalandra
Figure 4. The stability of the EGA network before reduction (left) versus after (right) reduction. The stability plot shows a massive improvement in stability post-reduction. Additionally,
the NMI has increased by about 4%

27

7.1.3 Output Variations by Flag
The aforementioned output structure occurs under default settings and is likely sufficient for many
researchers. However, this output structure may change, depending on if any of these four flags
are changed from the default of FALSE to TRUE: items.only, embeddings.only, keep.org, and
run.overall. Additionally, the output changes when the flag all.together = TRUE, but in a
more fundamental way; this flag is covered in Section 7.1.4.
As discussed previously, when items.only = TRUE, the function skips embedding, network
analysis, and reduction entirely. It returns a simple data.frame with four columns (ID, statement,
type, and attribute). This data frame contains the raw generated item pool. This is useful when
the researcher wants to inspect or manually curate items before running the psychometric pipeline,
or when items will be embedded externally and passed to GENIE().
When embeddings.only = TRUE, the function generates items and computes embeddings but
skips the psychometric reduction pipeline. It returns a named list with two elements: embeddings
(the embedding matrix) and items (the items data.frame described above).
When keep.org = TRUE, the top-level structure remains the same (item_type_level and
overall), but each per-type sublist gains an initial_items field. This field contains a data
frame of all items generated before reduction. The embeddings sublists also gain full_org and
sparse_org matrices corresponding to the full pre-reduction item pool. The overall element
similarly gains initial_items, full_org, and sparse_org.
When run.overall = TRUE, the item_type_level results are unchanged, but the overall
element becomes a full analysis object rather than a simple aggregation. It includes its own final_NMI,
initial_NMI, EGA.model_selected, final_EGA, initial_EGA, start_N, final_N, and network_plot.
Critically, this overall analysis does not perform additional reduction— it evaluates the combined post-reduction item pool as a whole, which is useful for assessing cross-trait dimensionality.
7.1.4 The all.together Flag
By default, the reduction pipeline processes each item type independently. In our example, for instance, openness items are embedded, analyzed, and pruned without any knowledge of the conscientiousness items, and vice versa. This strategy is likely the most appropriate strategy for researchers.
Setting all.together = TRUE changes this behavior fundamentally. Instead of running separate pipelines for each item type, the function pools every generated item into a single batch and
runs the full reduction pipeline on the entire pool simultaneously. This means that UVA can now
detect and remove redundancies that span item types (e.g., a "warmth" item under agreeableness that
is semantically indistinguishable from a "friendliness" item under extraversion), and EGA estimates
a single network structure across all items at once.
Internally, when all.together = TRUE, the package reassigns each item’s attribute to a
concatenation of its original type and attribute (e.g., "openness creative", "neuroticism anxious")
and collapses all items into a single nominal type. The pipeline then proceeds as though there were
only one item type, and NMI is computed against this concatenated attribute structure.
The output structure also changes. Rather than the two-level item_type_level / overall organization, the function returns a flat named list containing: final_NMI, initial_NMI, embeddings,
UVA, bootEGA, EGA.model_selected, final_items, final_EGA, initial_EGA, start_N, final_N,
network_plot, and stability_plot. These are the same elements described in the per-type
breakdown above, but applied to the combined pool.
When the boundaries between item types are theoretically fuzzy and the researcher suspects
that constructs may share substantial semantic overlap, altering this flag may be a good exploratory
step. Additionally, when the researcher wants to let the network structure emerge entirely from
the data rather than imposing a type-level separation a priori, changing this flag may prove fruitful.

28

Lara Russell-Lasalandra

Note that all.together is ignored when only one item type is present, since there is no distinction
between per-type and pooled reduction in that case.
Lastly, it’s is worth explicitly contrasting all.together with run.overall since their names
are so similar. The run.overall flag does not change how reduction works— items are still pruned
independently within each type. It simply adds a post-hoc EGA analysis of the combined final pool
to assess cross-trait structure. Whereas with all.together, the reduction itself operates on the
combined pool, meaning that items can be removed because of cross-type redundancy. The two
flags answer different questions. The run.overall flag asks what does the cross-trait structure look
like after per-type reduction? While the all.together flag asks what happens when we let the reduction
pipeline see all items at once?

7.2 Running AIGENIE on An Emerging Construct: AI Anxiety
Now that the AIGENIE() function use and output has been demonstrated using the established
"Big Five" personality model, we now turn to a more realistic application: developing a scale to
measure anxiety about AI. AI Anxiety (AIA Wang and Wang, 2022) is a construct of growing
research interest that currently lacks a well-established, comprehensive measurement instrument.
Thus, AIA is an ideal candidate for demonstrating the package’s value for developing scales where
well established instruments likely do not exist within the LLM training data.
Wang & Wang Wang and Wang, 2022 identified a four-factor structure based on distinct sources
of anxiety that individuals experience in response to the development, deployment, and societal
integration of AI technologies. These four factors are:
• Learning anxiety is cognitive overwhelm in the face of AI complexity, including perceiving
one’s knowledge as insufficient for AI demands and feeling daunted by the pace of AI advancement.
• Job replacement describes fear of professional obsolescence, including anxiety that AI will eliminate one’s professional role, belief that one’s skills can be automated, and uncertainty about
career stability.
• Sociotechnical blindness is concern about societal AI impacts, including loss of autonomy to
AI systems, concerns about AI-enabled privacy violations, and worry about over-reliance on AI
technology.
• AI configuration describes unease regarding AI system opacity, including lacking confidence
in AI decision-making, confusion about how AI systems operate, and doubting AI’s reliability
and safety.
The original AI-GENIE paper included a small-scale simulation using this construct RussellLasalandra et al., 2024, and we follow the same operationalization here. When creating the item.attributes
object for AIA, it is important to consider the central themes of each factor:

# Defining the item.attributes object for AIA
ai_anxiety_attributes <- list(
learning_anxiety = c("overwhelmed", "inadequacy", "intimidated"),
job_replacement = c("threatened", "replaceable", "insecure"),
sociotechnical_blindness = c("powerless", "overly dependent",
"surveilled"),
ai_configuration = c("distrustful", "uncertain", "vulnerable")
)
With the item.attributes object defined, only a few more elements are needed before a scale
can be generated:

29

# Provide detailed definitions for each factor
ai_anxiety_definitions <- list(
learning_anxiety = paste(
"Learning anxiety refers to cognitive overwhelm in the face of AI complexity.",
"It includes perceiving one's knowledge as insufficient for AI demands",
"and feeling daunted by the pace of AI advancement."
),
job_replacement = paste(
"Job replacement anxiety refers to fear of professional obsolescence.",
"It includes fearing that AI will eliminate one's professional role,",
"believing one's skills can be automated, and experiencing uncertainty",
"about career stability."
),
sociotechnical_blindness = paste(
"Sociotechnical blindness refers to concern about societal AI impacts.",
"It includes loss of autonomy to AI systems, concerns about AI-enabled",
"privacy violations, and worrying about over-reliance on AI technology."
),
ai_configuration = paste(
"AI configuration anxiety refers to anxiety about AI system opacity.",
"It includes lacking confidence in AI decision-making, confusion about",
"how AI systems operate, and doubting AI's reliability and safety."
)
)
# Run the full pipeline
ai_anxiety_results <- AIGENIE(
item.attributes = ai_anxiety_attributes,
openai.API = "REMOVED", # API Key removed
model = "gpt-5.1",
embedding.model = "text-embedding-3-small",
domain = "technology-related psychological assessment",
scale.title = "AI Anxiety Scale",
audience = "adults who use or are exposed to AI technologies in daily life",
item.type.definitions = ai_anxiety_definitions,
response.options = c("strongly disagree", "disagree", "slightly disagree",
"slightly agree", "agree", "strongly agree"),
target.N = 80
)
The results from this singular run were promising. The NMI consistently trended upward postreduction (see Figures 5, 6, 7, and 8).

8. The GENIE Function
Not all researchers need AI-generated items, hence, the advent of GENIE. This function performs
all the same reduction steps as AIGENIE without the LLM-generation step (that is, AIGENE without
"AI"). The GENIE() function (or its local equivalent local_GENIE) applies the full network psychometric evaluation pipeline (embedding, EGA, UVA, bootEGA) to any user-supplied set of items,
without generating any new content.

30

Lara Russell-Lasalandra

Figure 5. The EGA network before (left) vs after (right) reduction for AI Learning anxiety items. The NMI improved by
9.48%. The final NMI is 86.91%

Figure 6. The EGA network before (left) vs after (right) reduction for AI Job Replacement items. The NMI improved by
9.39%. The final NMI is 100%.

31

Figure 7. The EGA network before (left) vs after (right) reduction for AI Configuration items. The NMI improved by
6.88%. The final NMI is 90.93%.

Figure 8. The EGA network before (left) vs after (right) reduction for AI Configuration items. The NMI improved by
9.37%. The final NMI is 100%.

32

Lara Russell-Lasalandra

8.1 Using GENIE with AIA Items
The GENIE() function requires a data frame with four columns: statement (the item text), attribute
(the sub-facet or characteristic the item targets), type (the overarching construct), and ID (a unique
identifier). The structure of this data.frame is identical to the data frame that is returned in
AIGENIE when the items.only flag is set to TRUE.
To better explicate the use of the GENIE function, we will continue considering the emerging
construct AIA discussed in Section 7.2. Firstly, an initial item pool needs to be specified and loaded
into the environment. We have provided a miniature initial item pool. This item pool contains
too few items (only 5 per item type) for a meaningful reduction analysis, but is nonetheless
still useful to understand the expected structure of the required data frame:
# Example structure showcasing how GENIE expects the items to be
# formatted
my_ai_anxiety_items <- data.frame(
statement = c(
# Learning anxiety items
"I feel overwhelmed by how quickly AI technology is advancing",
"I worry that my knowledge is not enough to keep up with AI",
"The complexity of AI systems makes me feel inadequate",
"I am intimidated by the amount I would need to learn about AI",
"I feel daunted when I try to understand how AI works",
# Job replacement items
"I worry that AI will make my job obsolete",
"The thought of AI replacing human workers makes me anxious",
"I am concerned that AI will take over my career field",
"I feel insecure about my professional future because of AI",
"I fear that my skills will become irrelevant as AI improves",
# Sociotechnical blindness items
"I feel powerless in the face of AI-driven decisions that affect me",
"I worry about becoming too dependent on AI technology",
"It bothers me that AI can track and predict my behavior",
"I worry about losing my privacy to AI-powered surveillance",
"I am concerned about how much autonomy I am giving up to AI",
# AI configuration items
"I do not trust AI systems to make important decisions",
"I am uncertain about how AI systems actually arrive at their answers",
"It concerns me that I cannot verify whether AI output is reliable",
"I feel vulnerable when I have to rely on AI I do not understand",
"I doubt that AI systems are safe enough to be widely deployed"
),
attribute = c(
rep("overwhelmed", 2), rep("inadequacy", 2), "intimidated",
rep("threatened", 2), rep("replaceable", 2), "insecure",
"powerless", "overly dependent", rep("surveilled", 2), "powerless",
"distrustful", rep("uncertain", 2), "vulnerable", "distrustful"
),
type = c(
rep("learning_anxiety", 5),
rep("job_replacement", 5),
rep("sociotechnical_blindness", 5),

33

)

rep("ai_configuration", 5)
),
ID = paste0("AI_", 1:20),
stringsAsFactors = FALSE

With items prepared, running the GENIE function is straightforward (a much larger dataset must
be used, so this code only serves as a reference and was not actually run):

# Run the full GENIE pipeline on your items
genie_results <- GENIE(
items = my_ai_anxiety_items, # ENSURE LARGE ENOUGH
openai.API = "REDACTED" # API Key REMOVED
)
The output of the GENIE() function is the same as the output of the AIGENIE() function, so
reviewing the results of the GENIE output can be done easily, especially if one already has some
familiarity with the AIGENIE()function.

8.2 Using GENIE with Existing Embeddings
If you have already embedded your items (perhaps using a different tool or during a previous session),
you can supply the embedding matrix directly to skip the embedding step:
# Suppose you have a pre-computed embedding matrix
# (rows = embedding dimensions, columns = items, colnames = item IDs)
# my_embeddings <- [your embedding matrix here]
genie_results_precomputed <- GENIE(
items = my_ai_anxiety_items,
embedding.matrix = my_embeddings # Provide your own embeddings
)
Skipping the embedding step is particularly useful for researchers who want to compare how different embedding models affect the structural analysis, or who want to embed items using a specialized
model not natively supported by the package. However, a vast majority of users will very likely want
to use one of the native methods. Additionally, if the embeddings are provided to the GENIE() function, no API calls (nor their keys) are required. Therefore, using GENIE() to replicate and share
results may be ideal.

9. Discussion
The present tutorial has introduced the AIGENIE R package, a comprehensive tool for automated
psychological scale development and structural validation. The package implements the AI-GENIE
framework Russell-Lasalandra et al., 2024, integrating LLM-based item generation with network
psychometric methods to produce structurally validated item pools efficiently. This R package allows
users an easy and practical way to dive into the emerging realm of Generative Psychometrics.
We have demonstrated the package’s core capabilities from basic installation and setup, through
text generation and embedding, to the full psychometric pipeline. Two running examples (the wellestablished Big Five personality model John and Srivastava, 1999 and the emerging construct of AI
Anxiety Wang and Wang, 2022) illustrated the package’s utility across varying levels of construct
maturity in the literature.

34

Lara Russell-Lasalandra

The most immediate advantage of working within this framework is the substantial reduction
in the time and cost required to produce a structurally valid initial item pool that has been checked
for redundancy. Traditional scale development typically requires a team of content experts to draft
items, multiple rounds of review and revision, and large-scale pilot testing before psychometric
evaluation can even begin — a process that can span months or years and cost tens of thousands of
dollars Fenn et al., 2020. AIGENIE compresses much of this early-stage work into a single function
call that generates, embeds, and psychometrically evaluates an item pool in minutes. By packaging
state-of-the-art prompt engineering, text embedding, and network psychometric methods into an
accessible R interface, AIGENIE lowers the barrier to entry for scale construction. This could lead to a
broader and more diverse set of psychological assessments being available, particularly for constructs
that are culturally specific, newly emerging, or otherwise underserved by existing instruments.
Additionally, the deterministic and source-agnostic nature of the reduction pipeline has implications beyond AI-generated items. Any researcher with an existing item pool— whether expertauthored, adapted from prior instruments, or compiled from qualitative research— can submit it to
the same embedding, UVA, and bootEGA pipeline for an objective structural evaluation. Thus, the
AIGENIE approach surpasses any method that uses the output of LLMs to evaluate item quality (e.g.,
asking an LLM whether an item is robust) in terms of its replicability. Additionally, AIGENIE avoids
the issue of using an LLM to evaluate an LLM, which raises a whole host of potential red flags.

9.1 Limitations and Considerations
Several limitations should be kept in mind when using this tool. First, while AI-GENIE provides
structural validation in silico, it does not replace the need for empirical validation with human participants. The generated and reduced item pools should be considered strong candidates for empirical testing, not finished instruments. The original AI-GENIE paper demonstrated that in silico
structural validity closely tracks empirical structural validity for the best-performing models RussellLasalandra et al., 2024, but this correspondence should not be taken for granted in every application.
However, while AIGENIE does not eliminate the need for expert oversight, it does fundamentally change where human judgment is most needed. AIGENIE shifts the focus away from
the laborious drafting of initial items and toward the higher-order tasks of reviewing, refining, and
empirically validating a pre-curated pool.
Additionally, the quality of generated items depends heavily on the LLM used. Newer and
more capable models generally produce better results, particularly when combined with advanced
prompting strategies Russell-Lasalandra and Golino, 2026. However, the LLM landscape is evolving
rapidly— models that are state-of-the-art at the time of writing will most definitively be superseded
by the time this tutorial is read. The package’s provider-agnostic architecture is designed to accommodate this evolution.
Finally, the AIGENIE package is under active development. The latest version of AIGENIE can
always be found on R-universe at https://laralee.r-universe.dev/AIGENIE, and the full source code
is publicly available for inspection and contribution. We welcome feedback, feature requests, and
contributions from the research community.
Appendix 1. Quick Reference
Appendix 1.1 Core Functions
Table 1 provides a complete list of the functions available in the AIGENIE package.
Appendix 1.2 Combining Providers
The AIGENIE package allows mixing providers for text generation and embedding. For example,
a researcher could use Groq for fast item generation with an open-source model while relying on
OpenAI for embeddings:

35
Table 1. Functions available in the AIGENIE package.
Function

Description

AIGENIE()

Full pipeline: generate items, embed, EGA, UVA, bootEGA

GENIE()

Validation pipeline for user-provided items

chat()

Send prompts to supported LLMs

list_available_models()

List models available across providers

local_AIGENIE()

Run full pipeline with locally hosted LLMs

local_GENIE()

Validate items with local models

local_chat()

Chat with local models

ensure_aigenie_python()

Configure Python environment

python_env_info()

Show environment details

reinstall_python_env()

Rebuild Python environment

set_huggingface_token()

Configure Hugging Face access

install_local_llm_support()

Install local LLM dependencies

install_gpu_support()

Enable GPU acceleration

check_local_llm_setup()

Verify local LLM configuration

get_local_llm()

Download local LLM models

results <- AIGENIE(
item.attributes = item_attributes,
groq.API = "your-groq-key",
openai.API = "your-openai-key",
model = "llama-3.3-70b-versatile",
embedding.model = "text-embedding-3-small",
target.N = 60
)
Alternatively, Anthropic’s Claude models can be paired with Jina AI embeddings:

results <- AIGENIE(
item.attributes = item_attributes,
anthropic.API = "your-anthropic-key",
jina.API = "your-jina-key",
model = "sonnet",
embedding.model = "jina-embeddings-v3",
target.N = 60
)
Appendix 1.3 Querying Available Models
Model availability changes as providers update their catalogs. The current list of available models
can be queried directly:
# Per-provider queries
list_available_models("openai",
openai.API = openai_key)
list_available_models("groq",
groq.API = groq_key)
list_available_models("anthropic", anthropic.API = anthropic_key)
list_available_models("jina")

36

Lara Russell-Lasalandra

# All providers at once
list_available_models(
openai.API
= openai_key,
groq.API
= groq_key,
anthropic.API = anthropic_key
)
# Filter by type
list_available_models(openai.API = openai_key, type = "chat")
list_available_models(openai.API = openai_key, type = "embedding")
Appendix 1.4 Supported Chat Models
Table 2 lists commonly used chat models and their shorthand aliases supported by AIGENIE. Note
that this is a reference snapshot; the list_available_models() function always returns the current catalog.
Table 2. Commonly used chat models and their shorthand aliases.
Provider

Models

Aliases

OpenAI

gpt-4o, gpt-4-turbo, gpt-5.1, gpt-5.2

gpt4o, chatgpt

Anthropic

claude-opus-4, claude-opus-4.6

sonnet, opus, haiku, claude

Groq

llama-3.3-70b-versatile, qwen-2.5-72b

llama3, mixtral, gemma, qwen

Appendix 1.5 Supported Embedding Models
Table 3 lists commonly used embedding models.
Table 3. Commonly used embedding models.
Provider

Models

OpenAI

text-embedding-3-small, text-embedding-3-large, text-embedding-ada-002

Jina AI

jina-embeddings-v4, jina-embeddings-v3, jina-embeddings-v2-base-en

Hugging Face

BAAI/bge-small-en-v1.5, BAAI/bge-base-en-v1.5, thenlper/gte-small

Local

sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2, bert-base-uncased

References
Astral. (2024). Uv: An extremely fast python package and project manager. https://github.com/astral-sh/uv
Asudani, D. S., Nagwani, N. K., & Singh, P. (2023). Impact of word embedding models on text analytics in deep learning
environment: A review. Artificial intelligence review, 56(9), 10345–10425.
Auger, T., & Saroyan, E. (2024). Overview of the openai apis. In Generative ai for web development: Building web applications
powered by openai apis and next. js (pp. 87–116). Springer.
Boateng, G. O., Neilands, T. B., Frongillo, E. A., Melgar-Quiñonez, H. R., & Young, S. L. (2018). Best practices for developing and validating scales for health, social, and behavioral research: A primer. Frontiers in Public Health, 6,
149.
Carlini, N., Tramer, F., Wallace, E., Jagielski, M., Herbert-Voss, A., Lee, K., Roberts, A., Brown, T., Song, D., Erlingsson,
U., et al. (2021). Extracting training data from large language models. 30th USENIX security symposium (USENIX
Security 21), 2633–2650.
Chakrabarty, T., & Dhillon, P. S. (2026). Can good writing be generative? expert-level ai writing emerges through finetuning on high-quality books. https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.18353
Chen, B., Zhang, Z., Langréné, N., & Zhu, S. (2025). Unleashing the potential of prompt engineering in large language
models: A comprehensive review. Patterns, 6(6), 101260.

37
Christensen, A. P., Garrido, L. E., & Golino, H. (2023). Unique variable analysis: A network psychometrics method to detect
local dependence. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 58(6), 1165–1182. https://doi.org/10.1080/00273171.2023.
2194606
Christensen, A. P., & Golino, H. (2021). Estimating the stability of psychological dimensions via bootstrap exploratory graph
analysis: A monte carlo simulation and tutorial. Psych, 3(3), 479–500. https://doi.org/10.3390/psych3030032
Clark, L. A., & Watson, D. (2016). Constructing validity: Basic issues in objective scale development. In A. E. Kazdin (Ed.),
Methodological issues and strategies in clinical research (4th ed., pp. 187–203). American Psychological Association.
https://doi.org/10.1037/14805-012
Danon, L., Diaz-Guilera, A., Duch, J., & Arenas, A. (2005). Comparing community structure identification. Journal of statistical mechanics: Theory and experiment, 2005(09), P09008–P09008.
De Paoli, S. (2023). Improved prompting and process for writing user personas with llms, using qualitative interviews:
Capturing behaviour and personality traits of users. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06391.
Evstafev, E. (2025). The paradox of stochasticity: Limited creativity and computational decoupling in temperature-varied
llm outputs of structured fictional data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.08515.
Fenn, J., Tan, C.-S., & George, S. (2020). Development, validation and translation of psychological tests. BJPsych advances,
26(5), 306–315.
Foygel, R., & Drton, M. (2010). Extended bayesian information criteria for gaussian graphical models. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 23.
Friedman, J., Hastie, T., & Tibshirani, R. (2008). Sparse inverse covariance estimation with the graphical lasso. Biostatistics,
9(3), 432–441.
Garrido, L. E., Russell-Lasalandra, L., & Golino, H. (2025). Estimating dimensional structure in generative psychometrics:
Comparing pca and network methods using large language model item embeddings. PsyArXiv Preprints.
Golino, H., & Christensen, A. (2025). Eganet: Exploratory graph analysis – a framework for estimating the number of dimensions in
multivariate data using network psychometrics [R package version 2.1.1]. https://doi.org/10.32614/CRAN.package.
EGAnet
Golino, H. F., & Epskamp, S. (2017). Exploratory graph analysis: A new approach for estimating the number of dimensions
in psychological research. PLoS ONE, 12(6), e0174035. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0174035
Götz, F. M., Maertens, R., Loomba, S., & Van Der Linden, S. (2024). Let the algorithm speak: How to use neural networks
for automatic item generation in psychological scale development. Psychological Methods, 29(3), 494.
Groq. (n.d.). Lpu architecture [Accessed: 2026-03-29]. https://groq.com/lpu-architecture
Güven, G. Ö., Yilmaz, Ş., & Inceoğlu, F. (2024). Determining medical students’ anxiety and readiness levels about artificial
intelligence. Heliyon, 10(4).
Holtzman, A., Buys, J., Du, L., Forbes, M., & Choi, Y. (2019). The curious case of neural text degeneration. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.09751.
Hommel, B. E., Wollang, F.-J. M., Kotova, V., Zacher, H., & Schmukle, S. C. (2022). Transformer-based deep neural
language modeling for construct-specific automatic item generation. Psychometrika, 87(2), 749–772.
Hu, Z., Rostami, M., & Thomason, J. (2026). Expert personas improve llm alignment but damage accuracy: Bootstrapping
intent-based persona routing with prism. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.18507.
Jiang, H., Zhang, X., Cao, X., Breazeal, C., Roy, D., & Kabbara, J. (2024). Personallm: Investigating the ability of large
language models to express personality traits. Findings of the association for computational linguistics: NAACL 2024,
3605–3627.
John, O. P., & Srivastava, S. (1999). The Big Five trait taxonomy: History, measurement, and theoretical perspectives. In
L. A. Pervin & O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research (2nd, pp. 102–138). Guilford Press.
Keane, D., & McNaughton, R. B. (2026). Using generative ai to enhance psychometric scale development in market research.
International Journal of Market Research, 68(2), 194–218.
Kong, A., Zhao, S., Chen, H., Li, Q., Qin, Y., Sun, R., Zhou, X., Wang, E., & Dong, X. (2024). Better zero-shot reasoning
with role-play prompting. Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), 4099–4113.
Li, J., & Huang, J.-S. (2020). Dimensions of artificial intelligence anxiety based on the integrated fear acquisition theory.
Technology in society, 63, 101410.
Lightman, H., Kosaraju, V., Burda, Y., Edwards, H., Baker, B., Lee, T., Leike, J., Schulman, J., Sutskever, I., & Cobbe, K.
(2023). Let’s verify step by step. https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.20050
Liu, A., Diab, M., & Fried, D. (2024). Evaluating large language model biases in persona-steered generation. Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024, 9832–9850.
Liu, X., & Liu, Y. (2025). Developing and validating a scale of artificial intelligence anxiety among chinese efl teachers.
European Journal of Education, 60(1), e12902.
Martin Kowal, J., Hurley Bryant, K., Segall, D., & Kantrowitz, T. (2025). Harnessing generative ai for assessment item
development: Comparing ai-generated and human-authored items. International Journal of Selection and Assessment,
33(3), e70021.
Massara, G. P., Di Matteo, T., & Aste, T. (2016). Network filtering for big data: Triangulated maximally filtered graph.
Journal of complex Networks, 5(2), 161–178.
OpenAI. (2024a). Api reference: Chat completions. https://platform.openai.com/docs/api-reference/chat/create

38

Lara Russell-Lasalandra

OpenAI. (2024b). What are tokens and how to count them? https://help.openai.com/en/articles/4936856-what-are-tokensand-how-to-count-them
Patel, D., Timsina, P., Raut, G., Freeman, R., levin, M. A., Nadkarni, G. N., Glicksberg, B. S., & Klang, E. (2024). Exploring
temperature effects on large language models across various clinical tasks. medRxiv, 2024–07.
Pearson, K. (1901). On lines and planes of closest fit to systems of points in space. The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, 2(11), 559–572.
Pedersen, T. L. (2025). Patchwork: The composer of plots [R package version 1.3.2]. https://doi.org/10.32614/CRAN.package.
patchwork
Peeperkorn, M., Kouwenhoven, T., Brown, D., & Jordanous, A. (2024). Is temperature the creativity parameter of large
language models? arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.00492.
Renze, M. (2024). The effect of sampling temperature on problem solving in large language models. Findings of the association
for computational linguistics: EMNLP 2024, 7346–7356.
Russell-Lasalandra, L. L., Christensen, A. P., & Golino, H. (2024). Generative psychometrics via ai-genie: Automatic item
generation and validation via network-integrated evaluation. PsyArXiv Preprints.
Russell-Lasalandra, L. L., & Golino, H. (2026). Prompt engineering for scale development in generative psychometrics. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2603.15909.
Shin, D., Kwon, S. K., & Lee, Y. (2025). Examining the efficacy of generative artificial intelligence in item generation:
Comparative analysis of human-developed and ai-generated reading tests. Education and Information Technologies,
30(16), 23981–24007.
Tao, C., Shen, T., Gao, S., Zhang, J., Li, Z., Hua, K., Hu, W., Tao, Z., & Ma, S. (2025). Llms are also effective embedding
models: An in-depth overview. https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.12591
Tengler, K., & Brandhofer, G. (2025). Exploring the difference and quality of ai-generated versus human-written texts.
Discover Education, 4(1), 113.
Ushey, K., Allaire, J., & Tang, Y. (2026). Reticulate: Interface to ’python’ [R package version 1.45.0]. https://rstudio.github.io/
reticulate/
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, Ł., & Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention is
all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30.
Wang, Y.-Y., & Wang, Y.-S. (2022). Development and validation of an artificial intelligence anxiety scale: An initial application in predicting motivated learning behavior. Interactive Learning Environments, 30(4), 619–634.
Wickham, H. (2016). Ggplot2: Elegant graphics for data analysis. Springer-Verlag New York. https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org
Zhang, B., Horvath, S., et al. (2005). A general framework for weighted gene co-expression network analysis. Statistical
applications in genetics and molecular biology, 4(1), 1128.
Zheng, M., Pei, J., Logeswaran, L., Lee, M., & Jurgens, D. (2024). When "a helpful assistant" is not really helpful: Personas in
system prompts do not improve performances of large language models. Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: EMNLP 2024, 15126–15154.
Zhu, Y., Li, J., Li, G., Zhao, Y., Jin, Z., & Mei, H. (2024). Hot or cold? adaptive temperature sampling for code generation
with large language models. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 38(1), 437–445.

