"General Intelligence," Objectively Determined and Measured
Author(s): C. Spearman
Source: The American Journal of Psychology , Apr., 1904, Vol. 15, No. 2 (Apr., 1904),
pp. 201-292
Published by: University of Illinois Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.com/stable/1412107
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

University of Illinois Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access
to The American Journal of Psychology

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

"GENERAL INTELLIGENCE," OBJECTIVELY
DETERMINED AND MEASURED.
By C. SPEARMAN.
TABLE OF CONTENTS.

Chap. I. Introductory. PAGE

I. Signs of Weakness in Experi

2. The Cause of this Weakness 203
3. The Identities of Science 204

4. Scope of the Present Experiments 205
Chap. II. Historical and Critical

I. History of Previous Researches 206

2. Conclusions to be drawn from these Previous
Researches 219

3. Criticism of Prevalent Working Methods 222

Chap. III. Preliminary Investigation

I. Obviation of the Four Faults Quoted 225
2. Definition of the Correspondence Sought 226

3. Irrelevancies from Practice 227

(a)
Pitch
228
(b)
Sight
232
(c) Weight 233
(d) Intelligence 233
4. Irrelevancies from Age 233
5. Irrelevancies from Sex 235

6. The Elimination of these Irrelevancies 236

7. Alternations and Equivocalities 238
Chap. IV. Description of the Present Experiments
I. Choice of Laboratory Psychics 241
2.

Instruments

242

(a)
Sound
243
(b)
Light
244
(c) Weight 245
3. Modes of Procedure 246

(a) Experimental Series I 246
(b)

C
"
II
247
(c)
"
"
III
248
(d)
"
"
IV
249
(e)
"
"
V
249
4. The Estimation of Intelligence 249
5. Procedure in Deducing Results 252

(a) Method of Correlation 252
(b) Elimination of Observational Errors 253
(c) Elimination of Irrelevant Factors 255
Chap. V. The Present Results
I. Method and Meaning of Demonstration 256

2. Correspondence between the Discrimination
and the Intelligence 259

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

SPEARMAN:

202

PAGE

(a) Experimental Series I 259
(b)
(
"
II
263
(c)
"
"
III
264
(d) . i" IV 265
(e) Conclusions 268
3. Correspondence between
tion and General Intelligence 268
(a) Village School 269
(b) The High Class School 269
(c) Practical Verification of the Argument 271
(d) Conclusion 272
4. Universal Unity of the Intellective Function 272
5. The Hierarchy of the Intelligences 274
6. Outer Factors Determining the Amount of
Correlation 277
7. Previous Researches Conflicting with the
Present Results 279
8. Summary of Conclusions 283
Appendix. Tabular Statements of Original Data
Correlations

286

CHAPTER I.

INTRODUCTORY.

r. Signs of Weakness in Experimental Psychology.
To-day, it is difficult to realize that only as recently as I879

Wundt first obtained from the authorities of Leipsic University

one little room for the then novel purpose of a "psychological
laboratory. "
In twenty-four years, not only has this modest beginning
expanded into a suite of apartments admirably equipped with
elaborate apparatus and thronged with students from the most

distant quarters of the globe, but all over Germany and in

almost every other civilized country have sprung up a host of

similar institutions, each endeavoring to outbid the rest in
perfection. The brief space of time has sufficed for Experimental Psychology to become a firmly established science,
everywhere drawing to itself the most vigorous energies and
keenest intellects.

But in spite of such a brilliant career, strangely enough this
new branch of investigation still meets with resolute, wide
spread, and even increasing opposition. Nor are its enemies at
all confined to belated conservatives or crotchety reactionaries;
they are rather to be found among the most youthful schools
of thought; their strength may be in some measure estimated
from the very elaborate apology which one of the best known
experimental psychologists has lately found himself called upon
to utter on behalf of his profession.1

1 Miinsterberg: " Die Grundziige der Psychologie."

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENERAL INTELLIGENC. ".

203

And, indeed, when we without bias consider the whole actual
fruit so far gathered from this science-which at the outset
seemed to promise an almost unlimited harvest-we can scarcely
avoid a feeling of great disappointment. Take for an example

Education. This is the line of practical inquiry that more

than all others has absorbed the energy and talent of the
younger workers and that appears to offer a peculiarly favorable field for such methods. Yet at this moment, notwithstanding all the laborious experiments and profuse literature
on the subject, few competent and unprejudiced judges will
venture to assert that much unequivocal information of capital

importance has hitherto thus come to light. Nor have the

results been more tangible in Psychiatry or in any other department of applied psychology.
Those, then, who have the highest opinion concerning the

potentialities of this new science, will feel most bound to

critically examine it for any points of structural incompleteness.

2. The Cause of this Weakness.
Most of those hostile to Experimental Psychology are in the
habit of reproaching its methods with insignificance, and even
with triviality. They regard it as an infatuation to pass life in
measuring the exact average time required to press a button
or in ascertaining the precise distance apart where two simultaneous pinpricks cannot any more be distinguished from one
another; they protest that such means can never shed any real

light upon the human soul, unlock the eternal antinomy of
Free Will, or reveal the inward nature of Time and Space.

Such blame, however, would appear ill founded-at any
rate, in principle. This same apparent triviality lies at the

base of every successful science. The three laws of Newton on
first inspection are by no means remarkably significant; yet by
a large number of instructed persons they have been found implicitly to contain the supreme key to every event on the earth

below and in the heavens above. When starting any new

branch of mathematics, again, most people have had occasion
to be astonished at the curious suddenness with which the

seemingly shallow beginnings have shelved down into drown
ing deep water. The general fact is that our limited intellect
can only hope to deal with the infinite complexity of Natur
after analyzing it down into its bare unaesthetic elements.
On the other hand, it must frankly be admitted that such a
procedure is, after all, only indirect; that it does not immediately handle the things which really interest us, but other
things which are believed to accurately enough betoken the

former; that the results arrived at concerning the simpler terms

are therefore always worthless, except in proportion as their

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

204

SPEARMAN:

elements have been proved beyond dispute to be ident

those of the more complex terms. Now, even in

sciences this proof is not such an infallible operation
can afford to neglect the possibility of lurking erro
may vitiate all our conclusions; and in psychical resear
dangers are enormously magnified. When we pass an
current through water until it vaporizes away into bu
hydrogen and oxygen, we can with reasonable precau
tolerably certain that we have still got in our jars al
whole of the same material substance, only reduced to
forms. But when we assert that the decision of Regu
vote against making peace with Carthage was no mor
conglomeration of visual, auditory, and tactual sensa
various stages of intensity and association, then ther
undeniable risk that some precious psychical elements
slipped through our fingers.

On this vital matter, it must reluctantly be confes
most of Wundt's disciples have failed to carry forwa
work in at all the positive spirit of their master. For
the simpler psychoses of the Laboratory have been inv
with great zeal and success, their identification with
complex psychoses of Life has still continued to be alm
clusively ascertained by the older method of introsp
This pouring of new wine into old bottles has not bee
benefit of either, but rather has created a yawning gulf

the Science and the Reality. The results of all good e

mental work will live, but as yet most of them are like hiero-

glyphics awaiting their deciphering Rosetta stone.

3. The "Identilies" of Science.
Here, we naturally arrive at the important question as to
what actually constitutes "identity" for scientific purposes.
As regards the material atoms of the physical sciences, this
relation is of two orders. There is the Identity in the looser
use of the word, which really means no more than uniformity

of potential function, or the fact of having like reactions under

like conditions; this alone constitutes the proper topic of the
science. And then there is the true Identity involved in the
metaphysical idea of persistence of substance, which in science
is only a convenient working hypothesis to aid in establishing

uniformities of the former order.

For psychology, also, the identification is of two orders.
First, there is once more Uniformity of Function, and again
this appears to be the proper topic of the positive science. But
the second order is quite disparate from anything in physics,

being that of inward resemblance as ascertained by introspection;

such a "Conceptual Uniformity," though in metaphysics per-

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

"GENERAL INTELLIGBNG." ."

205

haps of primary importance, in psychology is but an indispensable substructure-and one of lamentable fallibility. It cannot
even be forthwith assumed necessarily to imply complete

Functional Uniformity; and it is peculiarly insusceptible of

scientific precision, propositions scarcely ever admitting of either

decisive confirmation or refutation.

Now, it is one of the great merits of experimental psychology

to have largely introduced the direct investigation of these
Functional Uniformities, which have the infinite advantage of
being eventually susceptible of conclusive proof, and on being
securely established are in their turn capable of throwing back
a valuable corrective light upon the Conceptual ones also. So
far, however, this matter of research seems to have been almost

entirely confined to such correspondences as are approximately
complete (these, indeed, being the only ones attainable without

a new development of methodics). But the vast majority of
the functional relations are not thus complete; they are more

or less thwarted by other factors; they outwardly present

themselves only in the form of stronger or weaker tendencies.

And precisely of this incomplete nature are most of the
Functional Uniformities which connect the psychics of the

Laboratory with those of real Life.

4. Scope of the Present Experiments.

The present article, therefore, advocates a " Correlational
Psychology," for the purpose of positively determining all
psychical tendencies, and in particular those which connect together the so-called "mental tests" with psychical activities of
greater generality and interest. These will usually belong to
that important class of tendencies produced by community of
organism, whereby sufficiently similar acts are almost always
performed by any one person in much the same manner; if, for
example, he once proves good at discriminating two musical
tones, he may be expected to manifest this talent on any subsequent occasion, and even in another portion of the scale.
For finding out the classes and limits of these individual
functions, modern psychology seems to have mainly contented
itself with borrowing statements from the discredited " faculties" of the older school, and then correcting and expanding
such data by inward illumination. The following work is an
attempt at the more fatiguing procedure of eliciting verifiable
facts; the good intention and the difficulty of such an enterprise may, perhaps, be allowed to palliate the shortcomings in
its execution. Our particular topic will be that cardinal
function which we can provisionally term "General Intelligence; " first, there will be an inquiry into its exact relation
to the Sensory Discrimination of which we hear so much in

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC12:34:56 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

206

SPEARMAN:

laboratory work; and then-by the aid of informatio

coming to light-it is hoped to determine this Intelligence in a

definite objective manner, and to discover means of precisely
measuring it. Should this ambitious programme be achieved
even in small degree, Experimental Psychology would thereby
appear to be supplied with the missing link in its theoretical
justification, and at the same time to have produced a practical
fruit of almost illimitable promise.

CHAPTER II.

HISTORICAL AND CRITICAL.

i. History of Previous Researches.
Though, as above stated, mental correlation has in general
met with great neglect, yet a certain number of psychologists,
including several of the best known, have from time to time
turned their attention that way also. It therefore seems advisable, before entering into the present work, first briefly
to survey the results of these previous researches; they will be
found on the whole to indicate some very remarkable con-

clusions.

Only those correspondences will be taken into account in

which both terms compared are of a psychical nature; many investigators, after determining the chief measurements of their

subject's mind, proceed to make their record still more complete

by also noting his most prominent bodily characteristics and
external relations, such as his height and weight, the shape of
his head, the color of his eyes and hair, the birthplace of his
mother, etc. Such considerations, however interesting, do not
quite fall within the scope of the present inquiry.
Gallon. The first hint appears to have come from that sug-

gestive writer, Francis Galton. As early as 1883, the latter

stated that he had found men of marked ability to possess on

the whole an unusually fine discrimination of minute differences

in weight.1 The pregnancy of this idea is unmistakable.

But Galton appears to have been diverted from the point by
other interests, and to have contented himself with the above
general impression, without clinching the matter in systematic
investigation. In I890, however, on Cattell publishing an
article about "Mental Tests and Measurements,"2 a remark
was appended by Galton suggesting the desirability of comparing such laboratory values with " an independent estimate of

the man's powers. . . . The sort I would suggest is some1 ,, Inquiries into the Human Faculty."

2Mind, I890, p. 380.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENERAL INTELLIGENCE."

207

thing of this kind,-'mobile, eager, energetic; well shaped;
successful at games requiring good eye and hand; sensitive

good at music and drawing.' " It will be seen that subsequent
investigators have unanimously preferred a much less lively
programme.

Oehrn. The earliest actual experiments in mental correlation seem to have been those of Oehrn,' in I889, which at the
same time furnished the starting point for that special branch
termed by him, and now popular as, " Individual Psychology."
The latter must, however, be fundamentally distinguished from

the "Correlational Psychology" here advocated. For the

former deliberately bases itself upon introspectively determined

faculties and upon mental tests; whereas the latter begins by
empirically ascertaining both the faculties and the precise value
of the tests. The former endeavors to discover those small

deviations from general law which constitute " individuality;"2
while the latter, on the contrary, proposes methodically to

eliminate individualities as an obstacle to further progress, being

itself, no less than General Psychology, in search of laws and

uniformities.

Oehrn tested ten subjects in Perception ("Wahrnehmungs-

vorgang"),8 Memory, Association, and Motor Functions. In

accordance with his standpoint of a priori assumed faculties,
he does not correlate the results with any independent estimate
of his subjects' intellectual powers, but only the tests with one
another. He eventually comes to the conclusion that Perception, Memory, and the Motor Functions are "proportional to one
another," but that Association is rather inverse to all the

others!

Boas. The comparison desired by Galton between these

laboratory tests and on the other hand the psychics of practical
life was, as far as I am aware, first undertaken seriously by

Boas. In I891, the latter examined no less than I,500 school

children as to their Sight, Hearing, and Memory; and then-

following the example of the semi-anthropometrical correlations

of Porter and others-he proceeded to compare their performances in the above respects with their "Intellectual Acuteness"
(as estimated by their teachers). On the first two heads, un1" Experimentelle Studien zur Individual-Psychologie," Dorpater

Dissertation, I889.

2Oehrn and Krapelin propose to study "the fine deviations from
the great fundamental features of psychical conformity to law;" or
again, "to determine the essential differences between minds."
8 Even the term " individual" does not seem very happy, since it

chiefly awakens the impression of dealing with individuals as contrasted with masses. In this latter and much more appropriate sense,
Wundt uses "Individual Psychology" in opposition to his "Folk
Psychology " (Grundriss der Psychologie, p. 28).

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

208

SPEARMAN:

fortunately, the results have never been publish

regards Memory, wherein his method of procedure i
resembled that of Oehrn, the facts elicited were elab
Bolton,l who comes to the following conclusions:
"The Memory Span increases with Age rather than
growth of Intelligence."
" The Memory Span measures the power of concent
prolonged Attention."
" Intellectual Acuteness, while more often connec
concentrated Attention, does not require it, and it
said that those pupils who are bright intellectually
distinguished on account of their good memories." 2
It will be observed that these results are in sharp a
with the view of many modern psychologists, notab
who would make Attention the very essence of intellectual
power.

Gilbert. In 1893, at New Haven, another series of experiments was carried out upon an almost equally extensive scale,
and is still among the most important contributions to the sub-

ject. J. Gilbert applied several mental tests to about 1,200
children of both sexes, and then compared the results with
their "general ability" (again as estimated by their respective

schoolmasters).8

On this occasion, the original assertion of Galton was to
some extent practically corroborated. For Gilbert believes

himself to find a real correspondence of Intelligence with Sensory Discrimination both of weights and of shades. He also,
like Bolton, 'discovers a slight correspondence with Memory;
in Gilbert's experiments the child, instead of learning by heart
a row of figures, had to give his judgment as to when a musical
tone had lasted just as long as a previously sounded standard
one.

But the correspondence deemed most'positive and

was that between Intelligence and "Reaction-tim

particularly suggestive, on reflecting how especial

action-time depends upon concentration of the

The indication would therefore accord rather with Wundt's

view than with that of Boas. Curiously enough, when the
Reaction-time is made more obviously intellectual by further

complications (Discrimination and Choice), then the above

correspondence becomes reduced in amount.
Scripture. In the same little volume, appears an account of

an interesting experiment by Scripture, as to the correspondence
1 Am.Jour. of Psych., Vol. IV, p. 362.
2 Am. Jour. of Psych., Vol. IV, pp. 379, 365, and 366.
3 Stud. Yale Psych. Lab., Vol. II, p. 40.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENERAL INTELLIGENCE. "'

209

between shortness of Reaction-time and swiftness in lungingwith

foils. Unfortunately, his subjects are only seven in number.
He feels himself, however, "fully justified " in coming to the
conclusion that " the average fencer is not quicker in simple
reaction than a trained scientist, and neither class shows an
excessive rapidity." 1
The first part of the above sentence would well harmonize
with the intellectuality found also by Gilbert to be connected
with speed in pressing a button; but the latter part is difficult
to reconcile therewith, at any rate without painfully lowering

the credit of "trained scientists."

Dresslar. Also in I893, a quite new kind of correlational

factor is investigated, that of natural illusions. As is well

known, if we pick up two things of the same weight but of dif-

ferent size, we are almost irresistibly inclined to estimate the
larger one as being the lighter of the two; strangely enough,
the illusion still persists even after we know that the weights
are really equal. Some 173 boys and girls were tested in this
respect by Dresslar, and at the same time were classed by their

teachers into "bright," "good," and "dull." 2 Dresslar

found that the phenomenon was perfectly constant throughout
the ages tested, 7 to 14 years, and that instead of the fallacy
chiefly affecting the stupid children, as might have been expected, it on the contrary showed itself the more powerful in
proportion as the child was "brighter;" hence he concluded:
"The more intelligent the children, other things being equal,
the stronger are the associations between the ideas of size and

weight. "

Grffing. In the following year, H. Griffing examined the
other chief aspects of Attention.8 The two former workers had
dealt with its concentration or intensity; Griffing now inquires

about its amplitude or extensity. He does this by the wellknown method of " tachistoscopy: " a number of syllables are
exposed to view for a very brief moment, and the subject has
to try how many he can read in this practically simultaneous

manner.

The result of two independent sets of such exper
both cases that "the brighter students tend to ex
Bourdon. About now we come upon a new and s

phenomenon in the course of these researches

though originally prompted in England, had for

transplanted to America, in which country alone up t

ent date they had been cultivated so as to bear fr
1 Siud. Yale Psych. Lab., Vol. II, p. 122.

2 Amer. Jour. Psych., Vol. VI, p. 343.
3 Amer. Jour. Psych., Vol. VII, p. 227.
JOURNAL-7

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

SPEARMAN:

210

length the Old World also woke to the necessity of answering

the questions. France led the van, soon bestowing upon the

problem an original and characteristic impress.

In August, I895, appeared an article by Bourdon entitled
"Recognition, Discrimination, and Association." 1 For this

investigation, about a dozen subjects were tested in

(i) the power of recognizing words previously shown to

them;

(2) the power of quickly and accurately erasing from a

printed page certain given letters of the alphabet (this was one
of Oehrn's tests for " den Wahrnehmungsvorgang ");
(3) the number of ideas arising in the mind within one minute on a given suggestion.
The conclusion arrived at 2 is that all three faculties present
some correspondence with one another, but that this is much
most marked between Recognition and Association.
Thus upon this occasion, as in the work of Oehrn, the mental tests were only compared with one another, and not with
any independently obtained estimate of Ability. Like the German, Bourdon appears to consider that these three faculties,
Recognition, Discrimination, and Association, are so satisfactorily represented by the tests,8 that any otherwise gained values of Intelligence would merely be vaguer and less trustworthy
versions of the same data.4

Binet and Henri. Again in France, towards the end of the
year, there appeared an important article of similar tendency,
bearing the well-known signatures of Binet and Henrib and
setting forth the urgent need of " studying the relations that
exist between different psychical processes." They propose the

following ten tests: Memory, Mental Images, Imagination,

Attention, Faculty of Comprehending, Suggestibility, .Esthetic
Sentiment, Moral Sentiments, Muscular Force and Force of

Will, Cleverness and "Coup d'oeil." By these means, they
hope to measure off "a personality" in a fairly exhaustive
manner within i to i hours.

In the tests themselves, there is a new feature to be noticed.
Hitherto, these had been of the most elementary and unequivocal nature possible, as befits the rigor of scientific work. But
1 Revue philosophique, Vol. XL, p. 153.
2Based only upon nine of the subjects, for some had not undergone

all three tests.

8 Same article, p. I85.
4 it La m(thode i laquelle j'ai eu recours pour 6tudier ce phonomnn
(de la Reconnaissance) . . . pourrait servir a determiner assez
promptement et avec une rigeur satisfaisante quelle est l'aptitude

d'une personne i reconnattre." And similarly for the other two

faculties.

5L'annee psychologique, Vol. II, p. 411.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENRAL INTELLIGENCE."

211

this very simplicity had much increased the difficulty of making

the test truly representative of any more complex psychosis.
Binet and Henri appear now to seek tests of a more intermediate character, sacrificing much of the elementariness, but gaining greatly in approximation to the events of ordinary life.
The result would seem likely to have more practical than theo-

retical value.

Next year Binet begins to put his interesting programme

into execution.1 He examines about 80 children and 6 adults

as to powers of describing a picture shown to them, and by this

means discovers the existence of five fundamental types of char-

acter, the "describer," "the observer," "the erudite," "the

emotional," and "the idealist." "It is perhaps the first re-

sult," Binet remarks, "that has hitherto been produced by the
experimental study of the higher intellectual faculties."
Binet then compares these new types with " the notes and
comments which the professors wrote about their pupils and
which the Director of the school has carefully checked." But

as to the result of this comparison, unfortunately, only the fol-

lowing brief remark is made public: "Of five pupils whom I
had put into the 'emotional' group, four had a cold temperament, a dry nature, and a little sensitiveness; the fourth alone

seemed sensitive. "

Sharp and Titchener. The above work of Binet and Henri
found a speedy re-echo from the other side of the Atlantic.
Some experiments with the avowed object of examining this
new class of test are now recorded as taking place at Cornell
University under the direction of Dr. Sharp and with the aid of

Prof. Titchener.2 These were expressly intended to depart

from the older " German procedure " of dealing solely with the
" elementary mental processes," and instead were to subject to
trial the " French procedure" of directly handling the "com-

plex " ones.
The following classification was adopted: Memory, Mental
Images, Imagination, Attention, Observation, Discrimination,
and Taste. The subjects consisted of three male and four female advanced students. No independent information was obtained concerning the subjects' respective mental powers, it

being only attempted to ascertain whether the tests were consistent among themselves.
The results are not very encouraging:
"The lack of correspondences in the individual differences
observed in the various tests was quite as noticeable as their
presence. "
IL'atnne psychologique, Vol. III, p. 296.
2American Jour. Psych., Vol. X, p. 348.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

212

SPEARMAN:

"But little result for morphological psychology
tained from studies of the nature of the above inv
" In the present investigation the positive result
wholly incommensurate with the labor required f
ing of tests and evaluation of results."
In conclusion, Sharp suggests the advisability of
combining the characteristics of both the French
procedures with one another.
Wagner. Almost simultaneously, the idea of colla
tal tests with more practical methods of appraisem

take root in Germany also. In I896, a series of
for the purpose of inquiring into the question of

school children was carried out at Darmstadt under the direc-

tion of Dr. Wagner.' The children were from the new Gymnasium there and seem to have amounted in all to 44 (though
the information on this point is not very definite.) The test
investigated was the old one of Weber which had recently
again been brought to the notice of pedagogical circles by
Griesbach. As is well known, it consists in ascertaining how

near together two points can still be distinguished from one an-

other by touch. On this occasion, care was taken to obtain an
estimate of every child's Natural Talent (Begabung), Industry,
Attentiveness, Nervousness, and sometimes Temperament.
Unfortunately for our present purpose, the intention of the
experiment was not so much to correlate these psychical qualities
with the children's absolute sensitivity, as with the reduction
in such sensitivity produced by the fatigue of lessons. This
reduction is stated to correspond closely with the amount of
Attention paid by the child, but to be almost independent of
his Natural Talent. Once more, therefore, Attention and
Ability are contrasted instead of being identified.
As far as concerns the children's unfatigued condition, our
real present topic, we only learn that the nervous and indisposed have a less fine tactual sensitivity than the others.

Ebbinghaus. About the same time, another and much

more extensive investigation was officially instituted in Silesia

for the same purpose. Two entire upper schools, a boys'

Gymnasium and a girls' High School, were before and after
work subjected to three tests: the two old ones of Oehrn for
Memory and Association (memorizing and adding numbers
respectively), and the new "Combination Method"2 of Ebbinghaus. The latter observer in discussing the results devotes no
less than one entire section out of four to considering the rela1Sammlung von Abhandlungen a. d. Gebiete der pad. Psych., Vol. I.
2In this, a purposely defective text is given to the subject, and the
latter has conjecturally to fill in the missing parts.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

"GENNERAL INTELLIIGNCE. "

2I3

tions shown between these tests and the children's general

intellect.

He comes to the conclusion that the school order shows an

appreciable correspondence with all three tests, but least so
with Memory and most with his own new Combination Method.
He particularly points out that in the last mentioned this correspondence applies, not only to difference of class, but also to
position within each class; whereas in the case of Memory, he
thinks that if anything the least intelligent succeed the best!
The Combination Method would appear to resemble the new
type of test recommended by Binet and Henri, to the extent of
presenting a rather intermediate character between the elemen-

tariness of normal laboratory work and the complexity of

practical activities.
Wiersma. To depart for a moment from the chronological
to the logical order of events, this favorable verdict of Ebbing-

haus concerning his own new method was in I902 strongly

corroborated by some experiments of Wiersma.2 This time,
three schools were brought into service. Two of them were
special training establishments for male and female teachers
respectively, from fourteen to nineteen years old. The third
was a "Nachbildungs" School, namely, one for those of both
sexes who had already gone through the six classes of the elementary school; they consequently aged from eleven to fourteen. The total number came to about three hundred.

Following closely in the steps of Ebbinghaus himself,

Wiersma finds his average results to improve regularly with
the higher classes and with the higher sections of each class.
He takes great pains to analyze the factors upon which such
school position depends, and arrives at distinguishing Age,
Educational Development (Entwickelung), and Natural Talent

(Begabung). In many complicated tables and graphs, he

marshals evidence that the observed correspondence is most of

all due to the last named factor.

Binet and Vaschide. In I897, the question is again attacked
by Binet, now in partnership with Vaschide.8 But there is a
remarkable return, as far as psychics are concerned, to the old

less aspiring forms of tests. For he once more examines

children in Reaction-time, Reaction-time with Choice, and
Memory of Numbers. In addition thereto, he devises the ingenious test of motor ability called Dots ("petits points"); this
consists in seeing how often the subject can tap with a pen on

a piece of paper in 5 seconds. The intellectual order of the
'Zeitschrift fiir Psychologie und Physiologie, Vol. XIII, p. 40o.
2 Zeitschrift fiir Psychologie und Physiologie, Vol. XXX, p. I96.
8 L'ann6e psychologique, Vol. IV.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

SPEARMAN:

214

children was again obtained from their respective ranks in
class. The subjects numbered 45 and averaged about 12 years
of age. The results are exactly opposite to those of Gilbert,
for Binet sums up as follows:
"The Intellectual Order harmonizes badly with Reactiontimes and harmonizes well with the Memory of Numbers."
But better than either appears the correspondence with his own
"Dots."

This work was quickly followed by similar tests upon
subjects. For such purpose, Binet and Vaschide turned to
Normal School of Teachers at Versailles and there examin

youths ranging from i6 to 20 years of age.1 This time, the sc

positive results of the former experiments are still furth
duced; for even the correlation with Memory is somewha

in evidence. The relation with the "Dots" again presen

unbroken regularity, but this time it seems to have bec
inverse, the stupidest tapping with the greatest speed!
Seashore. We next come upon an interesting series of
fully conducted experiments, to which we shall frequently
occasion to refer. It took place from I897 to I899 at the
versity of Iowa, under the direction of Dr. Seashore, th
jects being nearly 200 children varying from 6 to i5 year
clusive.2

Here, the negatory note that we have first heard from
is reiterated, and now in much fuller tones. As regards

eral Intelligence (again as estimated by the teachers)

Memory of Time, between which Gilbert had found a v
marked correspondence, Seashore on the contrary dispo
the question in the following brief words: " There appea
be no functional relation between the two processes."
So, too, between Intelligence and Discrimination of Pit

For while Gilbert believed himself to have discovered some

such correlation, Seashore again says curtly: "There is no
functional relation; the distribution of the results practically

coincides with the most probable distribution according to

chance. '

He further compares General Intelligence with the faculty
of discriminating Loudness and with various Illusions of Form,
Color and Weight. In each case, he finds himself forced to
the same conclusion, that there is no indication of the bright
children doing differently from the dull ones.

Pearce. Again temporarily deserting the chronological order,
some other illusional experiments were carried out in I903 by

H. Pearce.3 These dealt with the subjective localization of
1 L'ann6e psychologique, Vol. IV. 2 Stud. Psych. Iowa, Vol. II.
3 Archiv fir die gesammte Psychologie, Vol. I, Part I.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENERAI INTELLIGENCE."

2I5

touch sensations and indicated that judgment tends t

warped by other immediately preceding touch sensations
same neighborhood of the skin. Pearce tested 32 childre
this way and came to the conclusion that the warp is dire
proportional to the child's intelligence. While thus corro
ting Dresslar rather than Seashore, he differs even from
former in that he declares the fallacy to diminish contin
with increase of age.

Bagley. The negations of Binet and Seashore were

carried to a still further extreme. W. Bagley, experimen
at Madison upon I60 children,l corroborates Binet to the
that Reaction-time shows no correspondence with Schoo
telligence, and also supports the latter's second and in
rather than first and direct result with "Dots; " for Bagle
only denies all correspondence between any motor abilitie
mental ones, but believes his work to demonstrate posit
that there is even a marked antagonism between the tw
that excellence in either direction is apt to be accompanie
deficiency in the other.2

Carman. In I899, at Saginaw, there was another investi
tion which, if we are to go by the number of children te
must be judged the most important that has taken place

this day.8 A. Carman examined 1,507 of them as to t

sensibility to pain (and also their strength of hand), noti
each case, as had now become usual, whether the teacher
nounced them to be "bright," "average," or "dulL" Not
much detail is given, but the following general conclusions are

arrived at:

"Boys reported by their teachers as bright were more sensitive than those reported as dull."
" Girls reported as bright were more sensitive and stronger
than those reported as dull. "

"Those reported as being especially dull in mathematics

were more sensitive on the right temple than on the left."
It is further discovered that

" Girls with light hair and blue or gray eyes are less sensitive to pain on left temple," but "on right temple they are

more sensitive than the dark."

This information is very curious.

Kirkpatrick. In 900o, a slight rally against the emphatic
denials of Binet, Seashore, and Bagley is attempted by E.

Kirkpatrick.4 About 500 children were tested in three " sim-

Am. Jour. of Psych., Vol. XII, p. I93.
2The relation between motor and mental ability appears to have
also been treated by Handcock, Peckham, and Porter, but I have not

been able to obtain access to their works.

8Am. Jour. of Psych., Vol. X, p. 392.
4 Psych. Review, Vol. VII, p. 274.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

216

SPEARMAN:

pie motor activities," including Binet's Dots, Cou
and Sorting Cards; their respective performance
compared with their degrees of intelligence as est
usual way by their teachers.
The result is in every case a decided corresponde

Thorndike and Woodworth. Hitherto, we hav

attempts to ascertain what I may, perhaps, be al
"statical correlation." But in i90o, Messrs. Thorndike and
Woodworth make a vigorous onslaught upon the still more
important and difficult " dynamical correlation." It is useful
enough to know whether any child that " taps," etc. with unusual slowness may thereupon straightway be considered as
"dull;" but it would be even more to the point to learn that
daily practice with the tapping machine could make him any

brighter.

Various previous researches had been distinctly encouraging
in this matter. Stumpf declares: ' The power of mental concentration upon certain points, in whatever region acquired,

will show itself effectual in all others also."' Gilbert and

Fracker had found that practice in one form of discrimination
or reaction-time brought with it improvement in the other
forms.2 Scripture writes, intending apparently to include in
tellective activities: "Development of will power in connection

with any activity is accompanied by a development of wil
power as a whole." 8 And again, Davis comes to the conclusion that " practice in any special act" develops ability " for

all other acts." 4

The experiments of Thorndike and Woodworth, however,

give once more a flat negation. The indications are rather

that the effect of training in any one mental achievement is of
little or no use for other intellectual performances, even very
closely akin. The persons tested were carefully exercised until they had acquired considerable proficiency in judging the

relative sizes of some pieces of paper of a particular shape.

But this so obtained talent seemed completely to depart as soon

as new tests were made with papers of a different shape, or even

of a somewhat different size. Similar experiments in other

sorts of feats led to the same result.

Binet. About the same time, we have another interesting

and long contribution from Binet.5 His subjects numbered

eleven and were specially selected as being the five cleverest
and the six most stupid out of a class of thirty-two. These
Ton.psychologie, 1883, Part I, p. 83.
2Univ. Iowa Stud. Psych., Vol. I.
8 Psych. Rev., Vol. VI, p. I65.

4Stud. Yale Psych. Lab., Vol. VI.

sL'ann6e psych., Vol. VI, p. 248.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENERAL INTELLIGENCCE. "

2I7

two groups, the "intelligent" and the "unintelligent," were

in all the tests opposed and compared.
Binet again confirms, and more positively than ever, that

Reaction-time, either with or without the complication of
" Choice," has no correspondence with Intelligence. He also

contradicts the correlation found by Griffing with the extensive

dimension of Attention, in the form of simultaneously reading
a large number of letters exposed to view for a small fraction
of a second; though, curiously enough, Binet finds a certain

amount of correspondence when he quite similarly exposes

some arabesque designs. And finally, he finds no correlation
with a new test of his own devising, namely: a trial how small
a change in the rate of the beats of a metronome can be accurately detected.
But, on the other hand, his formerly successful method of
Memory of Numbers now once more showed a marked correspondence with Intelligence. So also, and to a similar amount,
is a correlation shown by Erasure of Letters (like that of Oehrn
and Bourdon) and by Arithmetical Addition (more complicated
than that of Ebbinghaus). So, again, do his new tests of Accuracy in Counting Metronome Taps and in Counting Dots.
And so does his other new test, that of Copying: the subject is
to copy a certain amount of writing, and then note is taken as
to how many syllables he writes from each glance at the original; the more intelligent, the more words per glance.
But the fullest correspondence of all was presented by the
very old test of Tactile Discrimination, which we have already
seen successfully assayed by Wagner in I896.
Binet is further strongly of opinion that all these correlations

with Intelligence are most marked upon first trial, and that
they continually diminish in proportion as the intelligent and
unintelligent are both alike given more and more practice in

the tests.

Simon. Directly inspired, apparently, by the last research,
the correspondence there discovered between intelligence and
the Copying test was now corroborated under new conditions.
M. Simon conceived the idea that any such correlation should be
manifested in especially prominent relief at the Vaucluse colony
for backward children. He therefore tries seventeen of them,
and finds in fact that, with one exception, all those classed
medically as "Idiot " or " Imbecile " can copy fewer syllables
at a time than do those merely termed " D6gdner6 " or " Debile." 1 He concludes enthusiastically as follows:
"Convenient, short, and exact, this copying of phrases at
once constitutes a good method of diagnosing a child's intellectual development at the very moment of the experiment."
'L'ann6e psych., Vol. VII, p. 490.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

218

SPEARMAN:

Kraepelin, Cron. Other observers, however, would a
have been less fortunate in this region. Their applic
experimental tests, even to such trenchant opposition
lectual health and disease, has not led them to results
have felt able to pronounce entirely unequivocal. Th

work of Kraepelin and Cron comes to the followi

"At the end of these considerations, we will not hid

ourselves that the obtained results have fallen far short of what

one is accustomed to expect from collective experiments with
the simplest 'mental tests.' "
Reis. When the above investigation was renewed on a more
extensive scale by Reis, the latter finds indeed that these tests
perfectly well admit of being executed upon the patients in the
asylum; but the success would appear almost too great to fullfil

the desired purpose, for often the patients prove the better per-

fortners of the two; a man, for instance, medically diagnosed
as suffering from Dementia Paralytica with marked mental incapacity (deutliche geistige Schwache) more than once comes
out top of all fifteen subjects sane and insane alike.
Ca/tell, Farrand, Wissler. Now we come to about the latest
and in many respects far the most important of all these attempts to correlate laboratory work with the psychics of real
life. For amplitude of design, special experience of the directors, and lucid collation of the results, nothing up to the present has approached the researches which for about the last ten
years have been progressing at Columbia University under the
guidance of Cattell.
In I896, the latter, together with Farrand. allowed a brief insight into the nature and extent of the proceeding being carried

on. But not till 9Igo was the total upshot of all this labor
carefully put together and published by Wissler.2 By that

time, 250 freshmen and some 35 seniors of the University, besides about 40 young women in Barnard College, had under-

gone the following elaborate series of tests (in addition to others

not belonging to the present topic, such as anthropometrical,
etc.):
Perception of Size, Reaction-time,
Strength of Hand, Rate of Perception,
Fatigue, Naming Colors,
Eyesight, Rate of Movement,
Color-vision, Rhythm and Perception of Time,
Hearing, Association,
Perception of Pitch, Imagery,
Perception of Weight, Auditory Memory,
Sensation Areas, Visual Memory,
Sensitiveness to Pain, Logical Memory,
Color-preference, and Retrospective Memory.
1 Psych. Arbeiten, Vol. II, p. 324.
2Psych. Rev. Monograph Supplement, June, 1901.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

"GENERAL INTELLIGENCE. "

219

The general intelligence of each student was settled by his

average grading in all the different University courses; an

amalgamation of these separate gradings resulted in forming

eleven classes.

This class standing and all the above laboratory tests are

now, for the first time in the history of the problem, correlated

together with some mathematical precision. The final conclusions are about as blankly negative as could well be imagined.
We are summarily informed that
"The laboratory mental tests show little inter-correlation."
"The markings of students in college classes correlate with
themselves to a considerable degree, but not with the tests

made in the laboratory."

And on inspecting the actual figures representing the faint
correlations in question, it is mathematically evident that not
one of them is more than would be expected to occur by mere

accidental coincidence.

Aiken, Thorndike and Hubbell. Finally, in 1902, there
appears an interesting contribution to the subject from Aiken,

Thorndike, and Hubbell. Here "the functions in question

were much more alike than were those examined by Wissler.1
We have examined the relationships between functions in an
extremely favorable case." Nevertheless, on the whole the
previous negative results are once more strongly corroborated;
when some mental functions usually regarded as most purely
typical of the associative process are compared together, their
correlation turns out to be "none or slight."
2. Conclusions to be Drawn from these Previous Researches.

Thus far, it must be confessed, the outlook is anything but

cheerful for our project contemplated at the end of the first part,

or, indeed, for Experimental Psychology in general. There is
scarcely one positive conclusion concerning the correlation between mental tests and independent practical estimates that
has not been with equal force flatly contradicted; and amid this
discordance, there is a continually waxing inclination-especially noticeable among the most capable workers and exact
results-absolutely to deny any such correlation at all.

Here, then, is a strange enough answer to our question.

When Laboratory and Life, the Token and the Betokened, are
at last objectively and positively compared as regards one of
the most important Functional Uniformities, they would seem
to present no correspondence whatever with one another.
Either we must conclude that there is no such thing as general
intelligence, but only a number of mental activities perfectly
Psych. Rev., Vol. IX, p. 374.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

SPEARMAN:

220

independent of one another except for this common word to
designate them, or else our scientific " tests" would appear to

have been all so unhappily invented as to lie outside the

widest limits of those very faculties of which they are supposed
to form a concentrated essence.

It is true that Functional Uniformities might conceivably
exist of other kinds; but for any such there is even less evidence; nor would they appear at all a priori probable, in view
of the complete and surprising absence of that important one
constituted by community of organism. Failing all Functional
Uniformities, any connection between the experimental pro-

cedure and practical intelligence can then be no more than
"Conceptual." But this is a position scarcely tenable for

those whose chief claim is finally to have escaped from the
endless tangle of purely introspective argument; moreover,
such an admission would shear every experimental research of
almost its whole worth and deprive the systems built thereon

of their essential base.

Further, if thus the only correspondences hitherto positively
tested, those between Intelligence and its variously supposed
Quintessences, have totally failed to reveal any real existence,
what shall we say of all the other by no means so apparently
self-evident correspondences postulated throughout experimental psychology and forming its present backbone ? To take one
of the most extensive and painstaking of them, Dr. Schuyten,
from I893 to I897, continuously amassed evidence to prove a
close relation of the middle European temperature with the
faculty of " voluntary attention " and even more generally with

"the intensity of cerebral activity;" he seems to have repeated his observations on about five hundred different days,
upon each occasion indefatigably proceeding round Antwerp
from one school to another, visiting most of the time as many

as eight. Now, his actual test of "voluntary attention" and

"cerebral activity" consisted entirely in noting how many
children kept their eyes on their lesson books for five consecutive minutes; but, as far as I am aware, there has not yet been
any positive proof that this posture sufficiently coincides with
all the other activities coming under this general term of "voluntary attention;" and in view of the universal breakdown of
evidence for much more plausible correlations, Schuyten's a
priori assumption can hardly be admitted as an adequate basis

for his wide reaching theoretical and practical conclusions.
To try another example, we have seen that a favorite test,
successively adopted by Oehrn, Bourdon, and Binet,1 is that of
erasing from a printed page certain given letters of the alpha-

1The last named seems to have been the first to inquire into, rather
than assume, the range of function involved in this test.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

"GENERAL INTELLIGENCE."

221

bet; but sceptics are still able to contend that becaus
person can dash a stroke through a's and i's with unu

speed, he need not therefore be summarily assumed to p

an abnormally large capacity for discrimination generally sp

ing, say, for telling a fresh from an over-night deer's tr

distinguishing sound financial investments from un

Precisely similar criticism may be extended to almost the
whole mass of laborious attempts to establish practical applications of Experimental Psychology, whether for pedagogical,
medical, or other purposes.
Nor is the case much otherwise even with those stricter and

more theoretical researchers who are rather inclined to regard
as superficial any experiments involving large numbers of subjects. For however modest and precise may seem the conduct
of their own actual investigation, it nearly always terminates
with and justifies itself by a number of sweeping conclusions;
and these latter will be found to essentially imply some assumed
general function or process, such as "memory," " association,"
"attention," "fatigue," "practice," "will," etc., and at the
same time that this function is adequately represented by the
laboratory test. To take for instance the speed of mental association, there is hardly a psychologist of note who has not at some

time or other made wide reaching assertions on this point,

often indeed finding herein one of the pillar stones of his phi-

losophy; the more practically minded, as Kraepelin and his

school, content themselves with demonstrating the details of
its actual conduct, showing us how the rate will rise with

practice or on imbibing tea, how it sinks in proportion to

fatigue or mental disorder, how under the influence of alcohol
it for a brief moment slightly ascends and then becomes permanently and profoundly depressed. But all these conclusions
are derived from observation of one or two supposed typical
forms of this " association; " while the extensive experiments
of Aiken, Thorndike, and Hubbell reveal that every form of
association, however closely similar on introspection, must,
nevertheless, always be considered separately on its own merits,

and that "quickness of association as an ability determining
the speed of all one's associations is a myth." I The most

curious part of the general failure to find any correspondence

between the psychics of the Laboratory and those of Life is that

experimental psychologists on the whole do not seem in any

way disturbed by it. But sooner than impute to them-the
avowed champions of positive evidence-such a logical crime

as to prefer their own a priori convictions to this mass of testifying facts, it is perhaps pardonable to suspect that many of

them do not realize the full significance of the situation!
1 Psych. Rev., Vol. IX, p. 375.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

222

SPIARMAN:

3. Criticism of Prevalent Working Methods.

There is, however, an intermediate way between
this serious testimony and submissively accepting
sists in subjecting it to the most searching criticis

one is capable. But such a procedure quickly le

tions of greater generality; if we would deal with t
all adequately, we are compelled to enter into a g
cussion of the methods universally prevalent for d
association between two events or attributes. To t
tant topic a special work has been devoted.' For t
we must limit ourselves to the following brief exposi
chief deficiencies appearing especially to character
series of experiments just reviewed.
In the first place, only one out of them all (Wis
lumbia) attains to the first fundamental requisite of c
namely, a precise quantitative expression. Many w
deed, have been at great trouble and have compile
numerical tables, even bewilderingly so; but nowh

find this mass of data focused to a single exact

consequence, not only has comparison always been
between one experiment and another, but the exp
themselves have proved quite unable to correctly e
their own results; some have conceived their wor
that correspondence was absent when it really exist
considerable amount; whereas others have held up
correlation what in reality is insignificantly sma
we shall come upon examples of both kinds of bia
requisite is closely bound up another one no less fu
namely, that the ultimate result should not be pr

some form specially devised to demonstrate th

theory, but rather should be a perfectly impartial

tion of the whole of the relations elicited by the expe

Next, with the same exception as before, not one
lated the " probable error; " hence, they have had
whatever of judging how much of their results wa
to accidental coincidence. This applies not only to
ments executed with comparatively few subjects,
those upon the most extensive scales recorded. Th
being misled by combinations due to pure chance d
depend greatly upon the number of cases observed
larger degree upon the manner in which the data a
and presented.
Thirdly, in no case has there been any clear explicit definition of the problem to be resolved. A correspondence is ordi1 "The Proof and Measurement of Association between two Things."
Am. Jour. Psych., XV., 72.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENERAL INTELLIGENCE. "

223

narily expressed in such a general way as neither admits
practical ascertainment nor even possesses any great theor
significance; for a scientific investigation to be either pos
or desirable, we must needs restrict it by a large number

qualifications. Having done so, any influence included

excluded) in contravention of our definition must be consi

as an irrelevant and falsifyingfactor. Now, in many of

experiments that we have been discussing, even in those u
quite a small scale, the authors have tried to kill as many
as possible with one stone and have sought after the great

instead of the least-diversity; they have purposely thr

together subjects of all sorts and ages, and thus have gone

of their way to invite fallacious elements into their work. But

in any case, even with the best of intentions, these irrelevant
factors could not possibly be adequately obviated, until some
method had been discovered for exactly measuring them and

their effect upon the correlation; this, to the best of my
knowledge, has never been done. As will presently be seen,

the disturbance is frequently sufficient to so entirely transform

the apparent correlation, that the latter becomes little or no
evidence as to the quantity or even direction of the real correspondence.
Lastly, no investigator seems to have taken into any consideration another very large source of fallacy and one that is
inevitably present in every work, namely, the errors of observa-

tion. For having executed our experiment and calculated the
correlation, we must then remember that the latter does not
represent the mathematical relation between the two sets of
real objects compared, but only between the two sets of measurements which we have derived from the former by more or

less fallible processes. The result actually obtained in any

laboratory test must necessarily have in every case been per-

turbed by various contingencies which have nothing to do

with the subject's real general capacity; a simple proof is the
fact that the repetition of an experiment will always produce a

value somewhat different from before. The same is no less true

as regards more practical appraisements, for the lad confidently
pronounced by his teacher to be " dull " may eventually turn
out to have quite the average share of brains. These unavoidable discrepancies have always been ignored, apparently, on
some tacit assumption that they will act impartially, half of
them tending to enhance the apparent correlation and half to
reduce it; in this way, it is supposed, the result must in the
long run become more and more nearly true. Such is, however, not at all the case; these errors of observation do not tend
to wholly compensate one another, but only partially so; every
time, they leave a certain balance against the correlation, which

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

224

SPEARMAN:

is in no way affected by the number of cases assembled, but
solely by the size of the mean error of observation. The
amount of consequent falsification is in physical inquiry often
unimportant, but in psychology it is usually large enough to
completely vitiate the conclusion. This falsifying influence
has in many of the above experiments, especially the more extensive ones, occurred in exaggerated form; for even those
experimenters who are most careful in the ordinary routine of
the laboratory have yet allowed themselves to be seduced by the
special difficulties attending this sort of work; urged on the one

hand by the craving after an imposing array of cases - somewhat ad captandum vulgus -and sternly restricted on the
other side by various personal considerations (such as restiveness and fatiguability of the youthful subjects, fear of deranging school hours, etc.), they have too often fallen into almost
incredibly hurried and inadequate methods of testing. Here,
again, mere goodness of intention will not avail beyond a very
limited extent, for the most painstaking work is far from entitling us to assume that the observational fallacy has been reduced to insignificant dimensions; we can have no satisfactory
guarantee, until some method has been devised of precisely
measuring the disturbance, and this does not seem to have ever
been attempted.
The above criticism, of a perfectly general nature, must suffice

for the bulk of the researches cited in this chapter; later on

will be found a more detailed examination of those three partic-

ular ones which have dealt with precisely the same topic as the
present article. If here methodological imperfections have ad-

mitted of formulation with unusual sharpness, the fact must by

no means be taken as an especial condemnation of these and
kindred experiments. Certain faults have, indeed, been especially prominent, as, for instance, the large errors of observation; but, on the whole, the majority of them would appear to
contain at least as much good solid work as most of those more
strictly confined to the laboratory and to a very small number
of " trained " subjects; the former have only afforded a firmer
foothold for criticism, because they have confined the question

to a more simple unequivocal issue-though not yet nearly

enough so - and because they have assailed their problem in a
square positive manner. The final inconclusiveness of all their
labor is not so much due to individual shortcomings of the
investigators, or even of the whole branch of investigation, as
to the general non-existence of any adequate system for proving and measuring associative tendencies.
Under all these circumstances, in spite of the many previous
inconclusive and negatory verdicts, the question of correspondence between the Tests of the Laboratory and the Intelligence

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENERAL INTELLIGENCE."

225

of Life cannot yet be regarded as definitely closed. The on

thing so far demonstrated is that the old means of investigation

are entirely inadequate. The present undertaking, therefor
has only ventured once more to approach the problem, becau

believing to have elaborated a new and reasonably compl
methodological procedure, such as appears capable of at l

bringing light upon this and innumerable other important r
gions hitherto inexplorable.
CHAPTER III.

PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION.

I. Obviation of the Four Faults Quoted.

In the last chapter, four grave faults have been charged

against the entire antecedent literature on the present topic.
The first thing insisted upon was a precise quantitative expression derived impartially from the entire available data; we must

renounce adroit manipulation of tables and graphs, still

further rounded into the desired shape by ingenious argument;
the whole of our experimentally gained figures must without
any selective treatment simply of themselves issue into one
plain numerical value (varying conveniently from i for perfect
correspondence down to o for perfect absence of correspondence); this will here be done in the method that has been
successively elaborated by Bravais,1 Galton,2 and Pearson,8 and
whose formula will be found on page 252; in addition, lists of
individual amounts will be given in full as originally obtained,

and therefore can be freely used either for checking the present

results or for other inquiries. The second requisite was the
probable error; concerning this it may at once be remarked
that indispensable as is some evaluation, yet here less than anywhere else have we need, or even possibility, of rigorous exactness; approximate estimates will be appended to each correlation
in tables. The third fault indicated was the one deriving from
the errors of observation; little can be said in this place concerning the best means of reducing these to a minimum, for on
such head our requirements are scarcely different from those
already prevailing in all serious psychological research; only
some matters of special interest will be briefly touched upon
while describing the procedure of the present experiments in
the next chapter. Much more important for us is the fact that
1 Memoires par divers Savans, T. IX, Paris, I846, pp. 255-332.
2Proceedings Royal Society of London, Vols. XL and XLV.

8 Philosophical Transactions, R. S. London, Vol. CLXXXVII A,
p. I64.
JOURNAL--8

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

226

SPEARMAN:

the total effect of all such errors can be measured en masse and

mathematically eliminated, and that until this has been done,
no correlational value can be assumed as even approximately

accurate. The formulae for this purpose are given and ex-

plained in the already mentioned article; sufficient for the
present practical purposes will be briefly recapitulated at the
end of the next chapter.
The remaining point is that of irrelevant factors; this also is
more fully explained in the said article; it involves a thorough
preliminary investigation of all the terms concerned, without
which the most skillful experimentation and lucid exposition
will only be wasted labor; the produce of such preparatory
exploration will form the remainder of the present chapter,
while the processes of calculation will be given at the close of

the next one.

2. Definition of the Correspondence Sought.
The first step towards eliminating irrelevancies is to clearly
lay down how much we are to consider relevant, or in other

words to properly define the problem at issue. As already

stated, universal correspondences can never be the subject of
investigation; in practice we are forced to introduce a large
number of conventional restrictions, and for profitable work
these must be explicit and unequivocal.
Let us first take that of Kinship. Putting other animals out
of the question, we clearly cannot pretend adequately to sample
even the whole existing human species. In order to obtain the
simplest and least ambiguous results, it might seem desirable
to reduce this source of variation to the least possible dimensions; an ideal experiment would then be wholly confined to a
number of sets of brothers or sisters and to determining how
far the more intelligent brother is also the better discriminator.

But these narrow limits are most inconvenient on practical
grounds, and even theoretically there appears no great objection against extending the kinship to any range that does not

introduce inconvenient complications; we may eventually find it

necessary to exclude differences of social stratum, of sex, etc.;
or it may, on the contrary, be found allowable to admit all
these and even some amount of internationality.
Next, we must bear in mind that the action of correctly distinguishing between two sounds or weights is a matter depending on many factors, and we must decide how many of these
should be rejected as foreign to our purpose. In the present
case, it seems best to limit the object of our research to that

portion of the discriminating act which appears to constitute its

1 "The Proof and Measurement of Association between Two Things."

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

"GENBNRAL INTELLIGENCE. "

227

specific core, excluding as far as possible such more outward in
fluences as Zeal, Endurance, Manual Dexterity, Memory, etc.
The last named requires especial attention, since it necessaril
enters into all these mental tests. Its influence will greatly
differ according to the method of procedure: the interval inter-

vening between the two compared sensations may vary from
small fraction of a second to several minutes; it may leave th
reagent's attention undisturbed, or it may make distracting
calls upon it (such as causing him accurately to adjust an instrument). One of the investigations cited in the last chapte
has gone so far in this direction, that a test called by the ex
perimenters themselves "Perception of Pitch " is by the com
piler preferably termed "Pitch Memory." 1 Now, the correla
tions of Memory -as far at any rate as my own researches

have hitherto gone--would indicate laws entirely differen

from those of Discrimination; if this be confirmed, any inter
ference of the former factor may gravely perturb an investig

tion into the latter.

Thirdly, the correspondence selected for inquiry in the pres

ent case is that between natural innate faculties. By this

definition, we explicitly declare that all such individual circumstances as after birth materially modify the investigate
function are irrelevant and must be adequately eliminated; ou

results might, therefore, be wholly vitiated if we threw together

people in disparate ages, those in full vigor and those tired o
ill, those who have already practised the test in question and
those to whom it is new, etc. To obviate this, we are obliged
to search through the records of previous work, so as to ascer
tain all the influences that have been found seriously to affec
any of the variants now in question. The chief results of such
preparatory investigation will now be briefly detailed, and fo
the sake of conciseness and unequivocality we will at once as
far as possible explain and correct these antecedent data by co

lating them with the information subsequently derived from the

present experiments themselves. The most prominent turn ou
to be Practice, Age, and Sex, which will be discussed in this

order.

3. Irrelevancies from Practice.

The importance of having defined our correlation will her
at once be evident. For if we had wished to inquire whether

Some experimenters (Lehmann, Angell), it is true, have found
that "correctness of sensory judgment is practically independent of
time interval" up to at least a minute, and even of deliberate distrac
tion (Angell, Wundt's Phil. Stud., Vol. XVII, p. II). I have, however, been unable to convince myself that this conclusion holds at all
good for the ordinary conditions of experiment.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

228

SPEARMAN:

sensory acuteness and general intellect are correlated dy
cally, if (as stated by many persons on the strength appa
of a priori reasoning) we had assumed that the discrimin

of minute differences of sensation " is to be cultivated as the

foundation of all intelligence," 1 then we should have had to
admit the variations due to Practice as perfectly relevant and
we should have looked for a continual expansion in people's
general ability in proportion to the labor they had expended
on distinguishing tones, shades, and weights from one another.
In the present experiments, however, it has been preferred to
commence by investigating the statical relation; it has not been

asked whether Intelligence is produced by development of

sensory acuteness, but whether the former original endowment
is on the whole accompanied by a corresponding amount of the
latter also. From this it follows that we are bound to carefully

eliminate differences of previous exercise.

(a) Pitch. In this branch of Discrimination the effects of
Practice are especially conspicuous, but nevertheless they are
not very easy to trace out with the quantitative precision required for our purpose. Experiment has, indeed, unanimously

demonstrated that the threshold of discrimination to be reached

by trained and competent acousticians, even when using quite
different apparatus, is in the immediate neighborhood of I/3
v. d.;2 but there is no such general agreement concerning the

average threshold of "unpractised" persons. Delezenne, for

instance, finds that an interval equivalent in the centre octaves
to about i v. d. "becomes sensible to the least practised ears,
as I have assured myself on several people," 8 But Preyer, on
the other hand (though quite agreeing with Delezenne as regards the powers of practised acousticians), tried a few unpractised persons and found that they could not all decide with certainty unless the two tones differed by as much as 8 v. d.4 And
8 Die Grenze der Tonwahrnehmung.

Pulling: Teachers' Text book of Practical Psychology, p. i6.
2 In the present work, it is taken that a threshold obtained in v. d.
(=vibrations difference) for any tone within the two octaves above the
middle C may be assumed also to hold approximately good for the remainder of these two octaves and both above and below gradually to
augment. So much appears sufficiently demonstrated by the works of
Preyer (Die Grenze der Tonwahrnehmung), Luft (Wundt's Phil. Stud.,
Vol. IV, pp. 5II ff.), and Meyer (Zeit. f. Psych. u. Phys., Vol. XVI,
p. 352). Hence the results of all experiments conduqted anywhere
near the centre of the ordinary musical scale admit of being easily collated with one another. For procedure in comparing any values obtained by the method of " Minimal Changes" with those by " Right
and Wrong Cases," see Lorenz (Wundt's Phil. Stud., Vol. II), Merkel
(Ibid., Vols. IV and VII), Kampfe (Ibid., Vol. VIII), and Mosch
(Ibid., Vol. XX).
4 Recueil des travaux de la Soc. de Lille, I827, p. 4.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GBNERAL INTELLIGENCE.'

229

when we come to the more extensive experiments of Cattell
and Farrand upon male and female University students, we find
that the average error for the F below the middle C was over a

whole tone, which (after making all possible allowances for
diversity in procedure; both experiments were conducted on
monochords) must be taken as at least twenty times worse than

the results of Delezenne.1

This and similar apparent discrepancies, however, seem to
proceed from a too vague and also too narrow conception of
" Practice." Many writers freely make assertions concerning
"highly trained reagents" (geiibte Versuchspersonen) without stating -often, it would appear, without clearly realizing
- whether the latter are merely trained in music generally, or
have had special practice in distinguishing minute differences
of Pitch. Other authors, on the contrary, term all their subjects "unpractised," even though accomplished musicians, if
they happen to be new to this particular experiment; in such
sense must be taken Delezenne's designation "les oreilles les
moins exerc6es," for his reagents seem from the context to

have been distinctly above the average as regards general

musicality. Now, though the hyperacute sensitivity characterizing the acousticians has not been found (by the present
writer at least) in most musical performers, even professional,
yet the latter are at any rate considerably superior to the average person. Thus we so far have three very distinct grades of
training: acousticians, musicians, and the rest.
There is also another kind of practice that must always be
duly considered, namely that gained during even brief experiments. The Columbia undergraduates, for instance, who had
a monochord put into their hands and were told to forthwith
adjust it so as to produce unison with a previously given note,
were, as regards training, almost as far removed from subjects
whose examination lasts a quarter of an hour, as these again
are from the long exercised reagents of Stumpf, Luft, etc.

Lastly, there is a factor which though analogous to Practice
yet must not be too summarily identified therewith; this is the

influence of General Culture. It will require discussion in

some detail, as it does not seem to have hitherto gained much

attention, since it is peculiarly liable to engender fallacies in com-

parative tests of children's discrimination, and may eventu-

ally prove of profound theoretical importance. A glance at

Table V will present a very marked inferiority on the part of
the villagers as compared with the better social classes, for the
former have a threshold more than twice as great as the latter.
Small as is the number of cases involved, the discrepancy is so
1 Psych. Rev. Monograph Supplement, June, I9OI.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

SPEARMAN:

230

large as practically to exclude mere accident.' The next

readiest explanation is that villagers have far less opportunities

of hearing music. But nearer investigation does not very

much confirm this view; for the village in question rejoiced in

the possession of an unusually fine set of church bells, and
whoever has listened to a band of sturdy yeomen ringing for

eight consecutive hours through all the possible "changes"
will realize that those in the neighborhood have ample opportunity of hearing musical intervals. (The present writer had

the misfortune to reside within a few yards of the said church.)

Moreover, with one exception, all the villagers examined were
in the habit of singing at home; while two of them were no
mean performers on the violin and organ respectively. The
violinist, it is true, exhibited the same discrimination as the
average good musician; but the organist formed no exception
to the general obtuseness, other than a far quicker capacity for

improvement.

The same phenomenon is equally conspicuous among the

young; for the village children, in spite of regular instruction
and practice in singing, had a threshold twice as great as that
found in the high class school. Also the relation between the
children and the adults tells a similar tale; for in those social
strata which continue after full growth to fully exercise their
higher mental capacities, there is no appreciable alteration of
ability to distinguish tones; the high class school has precisely
the same average as the cultivated grown-up person. Among
those, on the other hand, who at an early age are compelled to
turn all their energy to muscular activities, we find a corre-

spondingly rapid falling away of discrimination; bad as the
child villagers were, those adult proved themselves nearly
twice as inapt.

The only other experiments explicitly in this grade of

society, with which I am acquainted, are the interesting ones
of C. Myers; 2 and to these, without much straining, a similar

interpretation may be given. His European village children

(many of them possibly very young; unfortunately the ages
are not shown) present an even lower average than those in
Table I; that his adults slightly improve, while mine, on the
contrary, go down, may well be attributable to the known
habits of self-cultivation characterizing the Scotch peasantry.
Myers' Papuan children, with only a smearing of alien education, are accordingly worse than the Europeans of any age or
class; and on returning to the more congenial occupations of
1The improbability of mere chance works out mathematically to

about ioo to I for this series of observations alone, not to mention the

corroborative evidence of the children and other experimenters.
2 Archives of Otology, XXXI, 4, I902.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENERAL INTELLIGENCE. "

231

pearl-diving and cannibalism, their discriminative powers

appear to sink lower still.
There is thus considerable evidence that the ability to discriminate pitch is largely affected by deprivation of General
Culture. At the same time, this influence is only conspicuous
in tests of an unfamiliar character; the villagers were incompetent at the-for them useless-task of distinguishing tones,
but they show no inferiority whatever in the more practical

faculties of telling one shade and weight from 'another. It

would therefore seem that General Culture is not an independent factor that may be superadded to special sensory training,
but no more than a possible partial substitute, just as the carbohydrates can excellently supplement but never supersede
food-stuff containing nitrogen.

The various effects of all these degrees of Practice may now
be expressed roughly enough, but still quantitatively, in the

following tabular form: 1

Median thresholdfor Discrimination of Pitch among adults.
(Expressed in v. d.for the two centre octaves.)

European Non- Musicians Specially
Papuans Villagers o General Musicians Practised

Pa Villagers Culture Reagents

With a minimum

of

fore-exer- 3 4

cise.

After 15 min-

utes

fore-exercise.

good

i6

8

4

2

}

1 The Table appears to bring the various results of the best workers
into very good harmony with one another and also with my own. It
is regretted, however, that there is one exception to this general reconciliation; for it has been found impossible satisfactorily to accord the
above estimates with a noteworthy series of experiments at Iowa in
I896, under the general direction of Seashore. There, the male University students showed a median discrimination of about Io v. d., and
the women one of about 9 v. d. These values, taking all things into
consideration, appear at least twice as low as the analogous ones of
Delezenne, Preyer, Gilbert, and myself. Moreover, it is even harder
to reconcile Seashore's results from adults with his own simultaneous

ones from children IO-I4 years old; for the latter perfectly coincid

with our table, showing a discrimination of about 4 v. d., and would
therefore have double the sensitivity of the adults !
It must also be mentioned that Seashore arrives at a very different
opinion from the above as regards the general effect of Practice. He

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

SPEARMAN:

232

(b) Sight. In visual discrimination there is evidentl

scope for further improvement by special training, seei

the ordinary necessities of daily life are already sufficient

forth a large portion of most persons' potential faculty

respect.

But even here a considerable residuum of dormant po
usually remains over and may be awakened on sufficien
cise. Schirmer, for instance, found his threshold to cont
diminish for about a week of continual practice, after w
seemed to him to have attained its maximum, while M
Lyers and Simon8 continued to make appreciable improv
for many months. Simon further noted the curious fac
practice in judging with both eyes brought with it bu

betterment in judging with either eye alone; but wh
left eye had been practised by itself to its maximum p
then the right eye also, although itself unpractised, was
theless found to have advanced to its maximum. My ow
perience fully coincides with this view that the genera
people can considerably reduce their threshold by pr
Here, however, no appreciable influence is manifested b
eral Culture; the adults of the diverse social classes sho
about the same average, and also as regards the childre

difference is about what was to be expected from the diffe

in conditions of test.

This visual disparity between trained and untrained is diffi-

cult to estimate quantitatively. For previous experimenters
upon unpractised reagents never seem to have attempted more
than a rough empirical gradation incapable of being compared
with other work. Our evaluation must therefore rest solely
upon the present experiments, which, being conducted by day-

light, are far from guaranteeing sufficient precision on this head;

but still, as they turn out to agree perfectly with the mean of
previous records of trained reagents, in all probability they are

approximately accurate as concerns untrained ones also. In

this case, the median threshold for discrimination of medium
shades of gray, after 15 minutes fore-exercise, may be taken

as involving the following difference of luminosity:

Untrained Reagents Trained Reagents

I/30

I/I20

holds that neither musical educ
ally affect most people's power
view by inquiries instituted am
also upon a few experiments.
1Arch. f. Ophthalm., XXXVI, 4.
2Arch. f. Anatomie u. Phys., I889, Phys. Abth., Supplementband,

p. 96.
8Zeit. f. Psych. u. Phys., Vol. XXI, p. 433.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENERAL INTELLIGENCB. "

233

It would thus appear that in this faculty the influence
training is considerable, but still only about one-third of t

in discrimination of pitch.

(c) Weight. Here, curiously enough, Practice seems

have remarkably little effect; the most highly trained exp
menter has shown no advantage over the first comer.
Weber, for instance, declares 1/40 to be the difference j
distinguishable by " quite the majority of human beings, w
out any long preliminary practice; " yet he himself, in sp
of all his long labors, appears to have been much below th
standard.2 Similarly his successor, Fechner, after prodigiou
extensive training, was in the end but a very moderate per
mer.8 A more direct proof of the inefficacy of prolonged e
cise is given by the case of Biedermann and Loewit; for t
observers at the very beginning of their experiments fou
their threshold for one-half pound to be equal to I/2I; ye
the close of their protracted research, this threshold had o
improved to I/23.4

But however true this may be as regards training of very gr

duration, I have convinced myself that it does not hold go
regards the few minutes of fore-exercise; for my reagents

almost invariably discriminated better at the end of their fift

minutes than when they first entered the room; sometimes
improvement is enormous.
We come, therefore, to the general conclusion that a fe
minutes' practice are necessary for most people to accusto
themselves to the test, but that further training has little or

effect.

(d) Intelligence. As to the effect of training in this direction, there unfortunately appear to be no available data, except
such conclusions as issue from the present experiments themselves. All that could be done before commencing work was
to contrive that the reagents should, as far as possible, be on
equal terms with regard to previous education.
4. Irrelevancies from Age.
This factor is obviously one that must largely influence both
Sensory Discrimination and Intelligence, since nobody can sup-

pose that any mental faculties remain at one constant level
frtm first birth to the prime of manhood and on through the

last senile decay. The matter acquires peculiar importance

owing to the practical reason that we find it much easier to

1Tastsinn u. Gemeingefiihl, p. 541.
2Annotationes anatomicae et physiologice, Prol. XVII.
8 Psychophysik, Vol. I, p. I86.
4Berichte d. kais. Akademie d. Wissensch. zu Wien, Math. Naturw.
Classe, Vol. LXXII, p. 343.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

SPEARMAN:

234

subject children to our experiments than to induce
number of adults to let themselves be tested. Conse
every research of this kind so far has dealt exclusiv
reagents not yet beyond adolescence. We will again

each of the four variants in turn.

As regards Pitch, the first notable inquiry into the development of discrimination appears to have been that of Gilbert,
who comes to the conclusion that from the age of six to at least
that of seventeen years there is a continual though irregular
improvement.1 But the next investigator, Seashore, arrives at
the very different opinion that no betterment takes place after

ten, at which period he finds children to be fully equal to

average adults; he even goes so far as to pronounce that " the
organ of Corti reaches its maximum efficiency at the age of
about ten, and that it then begins to deteriorate." 2
By the light of the previous section, however, it seems possible satisfactorily to reconcile these very divergent results. For
we have just seen the immense effect of Practice, especially in
this matter of pitch, and we may not unreasonably suppose
such faculties to arrive at maturity earlier or later according as
they have been more or less fostered by education, special or
general. This hypothesis will be found frequently corroborated
in the present work. The high class school perfectly harmonizes with Seashore's elder children in presenting no further
increase of capacity after nine, at which age the average thresh-

old already equals that of adults; and this agreement with

Seashore extends not only to the relative powers but even to
their absolute performances, for both lots of children show a
mean of about 4 v. d. But when we turn to the villagers, then
the accordance is no less entirely with Gilbert: from 5, to 7
years, they average 40 v. d.; from 7 to 8, 23 v. d.; from 8 to
10, I5 v. d.; and from Io to 14, 6-7 v. d.; and here again also
the absolute values fairly coincide with Gilbert's, although the
latter used such a different testing instrument as an adjustable
pitch-pipe.

Even into very advanced life, the influence of Age appears
still interflected with the previously mentioned factor of Culture. For those adults who exercise their higher intellectual
finctions abide to almost the end of their days at their best
level; nothing is observahle to correspond with the generally
believed diminution of their audible range from i octaves to
o1. To myself, it was no small surprise to find that the persons of 60, 70, and even 80 years could discriminate quite as
acutely as those in their physical prime. But among the grownup villagers there seems to occur a marked bifurcation: those
1 Stud. Yale Psych. Iab., I893.

2Stud. Psych. Iowa, Vol. II.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENERAL INTELIJIGENCE.)

235

of them who on leaving school take to violin playing, hand-bell
making, etc., continue to develop the discriminative function
until it eventually becomes quite as fine as if it had enjoyed a
better start; but those who have not had such special later advantages will not be saved by occasionally hearing music from
lapsing into great dullment.
Turning next to Sight, Gilbert's very extensive experiments
again present a continual growth perceptible even up to the
seventeenth year; between nine and fourteen, the ages chiefly
entering into the present work, the average threshold becomes
reduced by about one fourth. My own results turned out quite
similar as regards the village children, but in the higher class
school development appeared to occur earlier. With respect to
Old Age, this again appeared to bring with it no impairment
whatever; the supposed " sharpness of young eyes" did not

make itself manifest.

In respect of Weight, Gilbert's curves show a somewhat
quicker arrival at maturity, no improvement being evident

after about thirteen years old.1 The present experiments quite
concorded in that the younger children were almost equal to
the older ones and both were not far from adults. In Old Age,
we once more find no appreciable loss of power.
Finally, we come to the effect of Age upon Intelligence. On
this matter general opinion seems to be sharply divided; for
some assert that, other things equal, a child must necessarily
get cleverer as he grows older; while others hold Intelligence
to be equally manifest at all ages after infancy and to be easily
distinguishable from the gradually amassing stock of acquirements and proficiencies. As before, in default of any positive
antecedent data the present experiments could only keep the
point in view and endeavor themselves to throw light upon the
question.

5. Irrelevancies from Sex.
This factor evidently requires consideration, seeing that in
some of the previous experimentation males and females have
been thrown together without apology, while at other times
these have been regarded as obviously heterogeneous to one
another.

Commencing with children, the only important evidence concerning Sight and Weight seems to be that of Gilbert,2 who
comes to the conclusion that the sexes not only differ but that
this disagreement is a quantity perpetually fluctuating from
year to year according to the various phases of growth and
especially of puberty. As regards Pitch, the chief testimony is
Stud. Yale Psych. Lab., I894, p. 59.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

2 Ibidem, p. 57.

236

SPEARMAN:

that of Seashore, who declares boys and girls to prese
least appreciable difference.
Now, it is very improbable that the various senses
really be so unlike in such a respect, and accordingl
not surprising to find that in the present experimen
lage boys and girls showed quite analogous difference
also. Perhaps Seashore's results may be reconciled in
way as before, that is, by considering that his childr
to have been better educated generally and therefor
passed beyond the perturbations characteristic of the
phases.
With respect to the influence of Sex upon adults, Seashore's
women present a slightly better discrimination, but the difference is only such as may well be attributed to their more gen-

eral study of music at the age in question. My own results

coincided, in that both sexes appeared perfectly equal in all
three senses tested; no support whatever was given to the popular assertion that men are much superior.
6. The Elimination of these Irrelevancies.

Thus we have come upon a considerable number of factors
which evidently disturb the relations that we are about to investigate; and the more we sharpen our criticism, the smaller
aberrations shall we be able to bring to light, until the latter
begin to appear infinitely numerous and hopelessly unavoidable; we successively encounter illegitimate deviations proceeding from hour of test, from temperature, from fatigue, from

state of health, from fullness of stomach, from habitual and oc-

casional consumption of alcohol and caffeine, and so on without
end. Eventually, our experimentation will arrive at the condition of the hysterical person who has found out some or other

medical objection to every description of food -and so dies of
self-starvation. To undertake any investigation at all, our at-

tention cannot be confined to the detection of these impurities,

but must take the further step of ascertaining which of them

we can and cannot afford to neglect in practice. With this

view, we have in every case insisted upon obtaining quantitative estimates of the differences actually produced by the various intruders, and we have found them to vary from the
extravagant proportion of I:60 down to inappreciability; from
these general computations, it will usually not be hard
approximately to pick out the amount applicable to any particular experiments.
So far, however, our information is still almost worthless.
For the perturbance into which we are inquiring does not depend simply from the above average difference produced in the
measurements by the intruder, but upon the ratio of this special

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENgRAL INTELLIGENCR.'

237

difference to the total average difference found in an assemblage
of individuals from both the disparate classes; this latter difference will clearly be the greater of the two, seeing that it derives

from many other differentiating causes in addition to the special one; the ratio will very approximately present the correlation between the disturbant and the term disturbed.1 Even

yet, though we have thus obtained all the requisite data, we
cannot utilize them to measure the perturbance until we have
further obtained a mathematical equation capable of performing this office; this will be given at the end of the next chapter; by its aid and that of the foregoing inquiry, we are finally
enabled to decide which of the irrelevancies produce a falsifcation of appreciable size as compared with the probable error;
all of less magnitude may be left out of consideration, as their
elimination would not be of the slightest practical advantage.
To avoid more tediousness, we will here take only two sample cases to illustrate how the decision is actually reached as to
whether an irrelevant factor be really of formidable nature. In
tests of Pitch, say, it is desired to know whether the reagents
may properly consist of non-musicians, mixed with musicians.
Our Table (page 231) shows us that the former have an average
threshold about twice the size of that of the latter; next, on
taking a number of thresholds of both non-musicians and musicians thrown together, we find that the ratio between the aver-

ages of the worse and better halves respectively comes to

something very near 3: (see any of the quoted works); hence
the irrelevant correlation is about 2/3 or 0.62. Applying the
appropriate formula, we find that under such circumstances a
real correspondence of say o.50 would be unduly deflected by
about o. r4. As the experiments were being designed on such
a scale as to give a probable error of only about 0.03, the perturbance must be pronounced very appreciably falsifying.
Let us consider the analogous case as regards the sense of
Sight. Here also, it may safely be assumed that diversity of
daily occupation among the reagents will have led some more
than others to practise this particular faculty, and further that
the extent of this discrepancy will on the whole certainly be
less than that between musicians and non-musicians (seeing
that very few people spend hours a day in discriminating small

variations of light and shade); again, the general effect of

practice in this sense has been found to be about one third of
that in Pitch (p. 232), while the total average difference turns
out to be about the same as for the latter; hence this time, the
irrelevant correlation will be at any rate much less than one
iSee "The Proof and Measurement of Association between Two

Things." This Journal, Vol. XV, I904, pp. 72-101.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

238

SPEARMAN:

third of o.62. On once more applying the suitable corrective
formula, we find that any irrelevant correlation of 0.21 would
falsify a real correspondence of, say, 0.50 by an amount of only
o.or. Thus we have ascertained that the deviation caused by

difference of Practice is in this sense not likely to affect our re-

sult by more than a very small fraction of the probable error
and may well be neglected.
In this way, a large number of irrelevant factors may be
summarily dismissed from consideration; others, either from

their amount or from the doubtfulness of the evidence concern-

ing them, must be carefully kept in view; while some will be
found of an unquestionably falsifying nature. The first em-

ployment of our knowledge is so to order our experiments from

the beginning, both as regards selection of reagents and procedure in testing, that appreciable perturbance may be escaped.
Next, and yet more important, we have learned the directions

from which serious danger is to be apprehended, and forewarned

is forearmed; we are enabled to so conduct our work, that the
residuum of deviations which could not be excluded actually
may instead be afterwards eliminated with mathematical exact-

ness from the final results.

7. Alternatives and Equivocalities.
Notwithstanding the exhaustive selective process which will
have had to be executed in order to sufficiently eliminate all
these irrelevant factors, there will generally still remain over a
certain number of experimental methods that at first sight appear almost equally eligible.
As regards Intelligence, to begin with, there is a considerable variety of ways by which estimates can be gained, and most
people would appear to enjoy very decided views as to which
are the most satisfactory; but since the convincement of their
opinion usually stands in inverse proportion to its evidential
value, it is perhaps safer to begin with the methods nearest to
hand and gradually discover for ourselves their relative advantages. In doing so, two points must always be carefully kept
asunder: first, the reliability with which any system of measure-

ment represents any particular form of intelligence; and secondly, the claims of the said form of intelligence to merit the
name. The former point must be definitely ascertained in the
course of the experiments, while the latter, though a very desirable piece of information, may or may not be eventually
elucidated by the whole investigation.
Sensory Discrimination will usually offer a still greater field
of choice. About the mode of interrogation, it here need only
be mentioned that the present wants are not necessarily identical with those of other psychological work. For instance, it is

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENERAL INTELLIGENCE.,

239

well known that the sensory threshold has really two different
values, according as the examination proceeds from greater to
less differences or vice versa; now, for questions specially concerning this threshold as such, it is desirable to take the mean
between the upper and lower values; for the present purpose,
on the other hand, more regular results appear obtainable in a
given time by determining only the lower threshold (the reason
seems to be that the reagents become less confused when the
changes are confined to the one direction).
Then comes the question as to what precise portion out of
the whole sensory range should be chosen as the theatre of our
experiments. For our pioneering work, at any rate, it would
appear unquestionably best to commence with that part where
the results are least exposed to irregularities, complications and
unknown factors; this will always lead us to somewhere near
the centre of the range.
Lastly, we must consider the influence of different apparatus.

It is a much more prominent factor in some senses than in
others. In Pitch, it appears to be minimal; highly trained observers, however variously tested, show little more diversity
than can be satisfactorily accounted for by individual disposition. Delezenne,'Seebeck,2 Weber,8 Preyer,4 Appunn,6 Stumpf,6
Luft,7 and Meyer,8 though using such widely differing instruments as monochords, reed-pipes, and tuning forks, obtained
results of which the largest is little more than double the
smallest, and even this small difference appears chiefly attribu-

table to difference in mode of interrogation. Among less

practised reagents, indeed, sensibility will sometimes be found
to vary enormously with the kind of timbre, one person doing

much better when there are no appreciable overtones and

another vice versa; but still such discrepancy is generally traceable to diversity of previous habit and continually diminishes
with further training. In Visual Discrimination, the results
have been considerably less uniform. It is true that the majority of competent observers, Kraepelin,9 Volkmann,10 Aubert,11
Masson,1" Merkel,'s etc., though employing such various in1Recueil des travaux de la soc. de Lille, I827, p. 4.
2Poggendorf's Annalen, Vol. LXVIII.
3Pogg., XIV.
4 Die Grenze der Tonwahrnehmung.

6 Ibidem.

6 See ref. to Meyer, note 8.
7Wundt's Phil. Studien, Vol. IV.
8 Zeit. f. Psych. u. Phys., Vol. XVI.
9Wundt's Phil. Stud., Vol. II.

0 Fechner's Psychophysik, Vol. I, p. 148.
Physiologie der Netzhaut, I865, p. 58.
2 Ann. chim. phys., I843.
8 Wundt's Phil. Stud., Vol. IV, p. 566.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

240

SPEARMAN:

struments as Masson's disc by daylight, the same by ar
light, the shadow-method, the episcotister, and illum
matt glass-all agree that the most favorable medium s
of gray can just be distinguished from one another w
illumination differs by about I/I20. But on the oth
Konig with Brodhun,' Helmholtz,2 and Bouguera arr

threshold twice as big, while Schirmer4 and Volkm
his later experiments) come to one nearly twice as

That, however, the lion's share of these dissimilarities
solely attributed to difference of instrument is shown
largest variation occurring in one and the same person

when using the platinum lamp of Kinig, has a still
threshold than the latter; but when employing a d
Schirmer, surpasses even this observer. The disco

assumes far greater proportions when we come to Disc
tion of Weight: for widely apart are the values succes

obtained by Weber,5 Fechner,6 Biedermann and L
Hitzig,8 Jacoby,9 Merkel,l? Muller and Schumann,1
and Muller,12 etc.; on the one extreme we have Bieder
and Loewit who could clearly perceive a difference in

weight if it were increased or diminished by so little a
on the other side, we find C. Jacoby whose five thor
trained and competent reagents required for the same

an increase or reduction twenty-four times greater, a disc
that for the main part may safely be attributed to differe

apparatus.
This multitude of gross fluctuations requires careful a
A certain number merely imply greater or less difficulty
performance and consequently a simultaneous rise or

for the generality of reagents. Others, again, deriv

difference of individual disposition; the larger these ar
procedure, the more accurately will any functional cor
be able to be calculated; but they must not be too sum
confounded together, for possibly one procedure may
greatest sensitivity to previous practice, while another
the most delicate barometer of fatigue or ill health, an
1 Sitz. Ber. d. Berl. Akad., 26-7-1888 and 26-6-I889.
2 Physiol. Optik, p. 315.
8Aubert, Phys. Optik, 488.
4Arch. f. Ophthalm., Vol. XXXVI, p. 12I.

6Tastsinn u. Gemeingefiihl.
6Psychophysik, Vol. I.
7 Berichte d. kais. Akademie d. Wissensch. zu Wien, Math. Naturw.

Classe, Vol. LXXII.
8 Neurol. Centralblatt, i888.
9Arch. f. Path. u. Pharmak., I893.
?0 Phil. Studien, V.

Pfliiger's Arch., XLV.
12Zur Analyse der Unterschiedsempfindlichkeit.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENERAL INTELLIGENCE."

241

third may reveal the largest correlation with intellect. The

remaining fluctuations derive from causes so obscure, that for
the present we must call them chance irregularities tending
only to shroud and disguise our results.
From these considerations, it is clear that an alteration in
method of experiment may result in transforming the correlation. But this further complication, far from being a real disadvantage, opens out a rich and virgin field to investigation,
for it is the most promising means of penetrating into the corre-

lation's essential nature. Eventually results will be gained of

such greater generality, that they will stand out constant

among these superficial changes, as the main features of a land-

scape abide immovable in the passing variety of cloud and

sunlight.

CHAPTER IV.

DESCRIPTION OF THE PRESENT EXPERIMENTS.

i. The Choice of Laboratory Psychics.

We will now turn to a description of the experiments that
form the basis of the present article. Their many deficiencies
can scarcely be clearer to any one than to their author; so true
is it that we first learn how properly to conduct any experi-

ment-when we have ended it.

As regards the nature of the selected Laboratory Psychic
the guiding principle has been the opposite to that of Bine
and Ebbinghaus. The practical advantages proffered by the
more complex mental operations have been unreservedly r
jected in favor of the theoretical gain promised by utmost s

plicity and unequivocality; there has been no search af

condensed psychological extracts to be on occasion convenien
substituted for regular examinations; regardless of all usef
application, that form of psychical activity has been chose
which introspectively appeared to me as the simplest and
pre-eminently intellective. This is the act of distinguishin

one sensation from another.

With respect to the particular senses preferred, the present
experiments have been confined to Hearing, Sight, and Touch.
The other five, Taste, Smell, Pain, Heat, and Cold, do not
admit of such practicable or satisfactory examination; also,
probably on this account, they have as yet been investigated
very incompletely, and therefore do not form a good unequivocal foundation for research of more advanced order. Further,
in the chosen three we have already the widest range of type:
for Touch is the most direct of the senses, the physiological
organ being apparently of such a simple structure as to convey
JOURNAL-9

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

SPEARMAN:

242

the stimulus to the brain in a purely mechanical manner;

Sight, on the other hand, offers the most perfect example of
peripheral transformation, seeing that our visual presentations
are but very remotely derived from the really external ether
waves with which they are popularly confused; while Sound
gives us a half-way stage between the above extremes.
In all three cases, the test has been of relative, not of socalled "absolute," Discrimination; the trial has not been as to
how small an external stimulus can cause a sensation perceptible at all, but as to how great the difference in the external

stimuli has to be for the reagent to notice any difference in the

sensation; every one knows the uncertainties attending the
former kind of investigation. Similar motives have in Sound
made Pitch seem preferable to Intensity; and in Light, Luminosity to Color. It is perhaps less easy to justify Touch being
represented by that form of it often termed the "muscular
sense," which despite its notoriety and historical importance is

now well known to be really most complex and obscure.1

Among other reasons for this choice, it was desired to see
whether any correlation of Discrimination with Intelligence
might not reasonably be attributed to adroitness in outward
approach to the distinguishment rather than to superiority in
the essential act itself; should this be the case, then the correspondence should be much more manifest in an active practical

comparison of two weights than in the purely passive acceptance

of two tones.

In short, the experiments were so chosen that any conclusions very uniformly attained in these three ways might be
provisionally considered to hold good for Sensory Discrimination in general.
It may here be remarked that the present experiments were

not primarily designed and executed for the sake of Discrimina-

tion itself, but as the indispensable basis for an investigation
into Memory and Imagery. Only afterwards was it decided to
publish the results on the former head separately, so as to keep
the present article within manageable length and at the same
time to secure for it greater unity and lucidity.
2. The Instruments.

The apparatus with which these inquiries were conducted

were not of a very new or elaborate nature, my object at present

being merely to make a practical and convenient application of
the existing laboratory methods. Moreover, while naturally

1 It is here by no means intended to assent to the identification of
the feeling of Effort with any combination of touch sensations, but
only to admit that the former is in practice chiefly estimated through

the mediation of the latter.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENERAL INTELLIGENCE."

243

endeavoring to minimize all errors proceeding from mech
imperfection, I have become quite convinced that faults a
from such a cause are in this case vanishingly small as c
pared with those proceeding from other sources.
(a) Sound. Like the experiments of Delezenne and Cattell
mine were conducted by means of a monochord, but of a special
kind made under my direction for this purpose; it is furnished
with a Vernier scale, whereby differences of pitch can readily

be produced down to y3 of a vibration; as the experiments

were limited to the immediate neighborhood of the E above the
middle C (reckoning the latter at 330 vibrations per second),
the smallest securely obtainable difference amounted to I/132

of a musical tone.

To the accuracy of such an instrument many theoretical objections may be raised, as unevenness of the wire, inequalities
of tension, etc. However, experience has shown it to be reli-

able to the range above mentioned, which is ample for the

present purpose. It was first tested in the usual way, that is,
by simultaneously sounding two notes at a given small interval
and then counting the interferences in the sound-waves; I had
no difficulty in producing good reliable "beats." The instrument has further been well checked empirically, for more than
one reagent has proved able correctly to discriminate down to
the extreme limit. I have also been fortunate enough to obtain
assistance in this manner from Dr. Kriiger; this psychologist
and acoustician very kindly allowed himself to be tested with
my machine and found his threshold to be only such a small
amount greater than with tuning forks, as would naturally
arise from his having had much more practice with the latter

instrument.

The principal crime generally charged against monochords
is that they give far stronger overtones than do tuning forks
and that consequently tests upon the former may not be com-.

parable with those upon the latter. This point has already

been discussed, and our conclusion was that all the different

instruments hitherto tried had led to very similar average thresh-

olds (in this respect being very unlike discrimination in Sight
and Weight). In any case, there is no reason whatever to
suppose that the results given by the overtoned instruments
are at all less regular, and this is here the only matter of
importance.
As a set-off against this one merit of comparative freedom
from overtones, tuning forks are in so many other respects
difficult to manage, that I should not personally prefer them
except for use in an exceptionally well equipped laboratory.
To bring them to sound, they have to be either struck with a
hammer or stroked with a bow, and the consequent accessory

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

SPEARMAN:

244

noises and tones can hardly be reduced to such a m
is easily attainable in plucking the monochord; also

from the fork only remains constant for a very short

which it rises very deceptively; further, it is very d
obtain two tones of sufficiently equal loudness, wit
a special striking apparatus which again involves ot
vantages. Moreover, it is almost impossible to obtai
range of tone in any satisfactory manner, especiall
the best tuning forks have appreciable overtones un

upon resonators to preferentially intensify the ground-

device of a different fork for each grade of pitch
dubious merits; and when the common custom is f
using one fork with the sliding regulator on it while
has none, the overtones become so dissimilar as fre

vitiate the whole experiment. The last objection

partially met by having on each fork a separate regu
light and low; but the first and second difficulties ar
sufficiently overcome by the usual expedients. such
the fork to and from the reagent's ear; to fully obv
it is at least necessary to be able to conduct the soun
room to another, so that the experimenter remains
forks and opens the conductor just when the tone is
true, while the reagent sits alone and hears only w
intended to hear; but such a procedure is quite inap
the inexperienced subjects requisite for experiment

present ones.

(b) Light. As we have seen, a great number of ins
have been at different times used for this purpose
them possesses various advantages and disadvantages
For my purpose, I constructed a graduated series of
being slightly darker than the preceding one. Th
delicacy was obtained by photographic means, on th
that the darkness of a print will (for a certain shor
half-tints) vary almost proportionately to the time o
to light. Various ways of printing were tried; sil
very fine gradation, but necessarily introduced the
element of color; carbon was found difficult to dev
sufficient evenness; final preference was given to p
the smoothest possible paper, and a series of prints
tained of such differences that the extreme ranges w
ure the dullest normal sight, while two neighboring
not be distinguished by the acutest vision.' The pri
about 2" by i", were then mounted on smooth cardbo

IThis method of constructing cards as visual tests seems
been very minutely anticipated as long ago as I896 by M
Zeits. f. Psych. u. Physio., Vol XII, p. 62).

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENERAL INTLLIJGGNC.' '

245

bered on the back, and given a border about one inch wide of
even black, so that the conditions of contrast should in all
cases be approximately equal.
The evenness of the series was then tested practically on

many reagents, by trying whether all pairs of cards at the same

number of grades apart presented precisely the same difficulty
of distinguishment.
As to the illuminating source, it unfortunately was not found

practicable to conduct the experiment by the uniformity of
artificial lighting. However, small differences of the absolute

intensity of the illumination are known not to appreciably affect

accuracy of judgment, and such was found to be actually the
case as regards the inevitable minor fluctuations of daylight.
The most important point was that the two cards to be compared should be illuminated to exactly the same degree. This
was sought by placing them side by side on precisely the same
plane and opposite the centre of an evenly lighted window.
Most reagents had a marked inclination to consider one particular side darker; in some cases this was the right, and in others
the left (I could not find that this tendency corresponded with
right and left handedness respectively, as might perhaps have
been expected in view of the experiments of Van Biervliet1).
The general luminosity of the cards was determined in the
following manner. The lightest and darkest were placed in a
dark room, and two candles were arranged in front of them in
such a way that each threw a circular ray of light about one
inch in diameter upon one of the cards. It was then experi-

mentally ascertained how much closer to the illuminating

source the darker card had to be, for the latter to appear just

as light as the other. The square of the greater distance

divided by the square of the lesser thus gave a measure of the
relative brightness of the two cards under equal conditions. It
would be superfluous here to enter into the various details
adopted to make this test satisfactory, seeing that the result is
at best only roughly approximate; for, among other things, the
luminosity was thus tested by artificial light, while the discrimination was tried by the different luminosity and tint of
daylight. Within the actual limits, however, it does not appear that the consequent error will be very considerable; hence,
the value found seems sufficiently accurate to be of some interest, especially as it is difficult anywhere to discover quantitative

estimates of the normal unpractised person's power to distin-

guish differences of light.

(c) Weight. For this test a graduated series of weights were

IL'asymetrie sensorielle, Bulletins de l'Academie des Sciences de

Bruxelles, Vol. XXXIV, S4rie III.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

246

SPEARMAN:

constructed on Galton's convenient cartridge pattern,' all of
precisely the same size, appearance, and balance: the lightest
was i,ooo grains, and the others continually increased their
weight in geometrical proportion. I found it necessary to considerably extend the range of differences; for some of my
reagents could accurately distinguish Galton's finest degree,
namely I/Ioo; while many perfectly normal persons showed

an obtuseness that could not be measured even on the extremes

recommended by him as being adapted for " morbid" cases.

3. Modes of Procedure.
(a) Experimental Series I. The reagents were the twentyfour oldest children of a village school in Berkshire, taken

without any selection: they were tested in Light, Weight, and
Sound. This school was particularly favorable for my purpose,
as it was within Ioo yards of my own house; all the children
and their families resided in the immediate neighborhood, so
that I could easily obtain any information concerning them;
the rector and schoolmaster most obligingly gave their valuable co-operation, for which I hereby tender hearty thanks.

Each child was separately interviewed in my house, on a

different day for each different sense. The test of Discrimination lasted fifteen minutes (and was then followed by test of
Memory; the coincidence between these two is a good measure
of the accuracy of both). No single trial was ever unusually
prolonged, for fear of admitting the disturbing effects of fatigue,

but further interviews were obtained when any doubtful points
seemed to require clearing.
As regards the manner of interrogation, there was little hesi-

tation in rejecting the method known as " minimal changes"
in its purer form, which is dependent upon the reagent saying
whether or not he can distinguish the difference between the

two sensations offered to him; such a procedure appeared totally

unfitted for such inexperienced persons. But still less applica-

ble appeared the strict method of "right and wrong cases."
The compromise was therefore adopted of searching for that
threshold where the subject seemed able to give about 80% of
his answers right. For similar reasons, preference had to be
given to the "procedure with half knowledge" (halbwissentliches Verfahren) in spite of certain disadvantages; 2 in this,
the reagent is informed that the two stimuli are different, but

is left to decide for himself as to the direction of the difference.

The beginning of the test is not devoted to recording the
largest possible number of answers, but to quietly affording
1 Inquiries into Human Faculty, Appendix.
2See Kimpfe, Wundt's Phil. Stud., Vol. VIII.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENERAL INTELLIGBNCE. '

247

the reagent a maximum of fore-exercise and at the same time

to gaining a general idea of his threshold. Then, there is a
steady progression from greater to smaller intervals, until

eventually a threshold is found where he can just give eight
right answers out of ten. He is further tried at a still smaller
interval, to see if he makes still more mistakes and thus to confirm the fact that he has really reached his limit. And finally
he is once more tried at a slightly larger interval than the believed threshold, to corroborate the former observation that he
here makes less than two errors out of ten. This constant progression in only one direction appears to very much reduce

the mental distraction especially inherent in all procedure

"without knowledge," which is very great in unpractised reagents if tested with the usual oscillations to and fro between
greater and smaller intervals. Against it may be urged that it
finds only the lower instead of the mean threshold, but this is
of no importance for our present purpose.

It was further considered that more regularity would be obtained by only recording those answers which were given under
the most favorable conditions. Before taking down each reply,
a chance of reconsideration was given by repeating the test in

such a manner as to reverse the constant error of time and
space.

The two stimuli followed one another in the manner found to

be most adapted to accurate judgment and to effectually eliminating the influence of Memory. In the case of pitch, the interval from the beginning of the first tone to that of the second

was found best at about three-quarters of a second. In some
earlier experiments, the first tone was just dying away when
the other began; but later, I stopped the first one altogether
just before giving the other. There is some knack required to
do this satisfactorily, and the practical effect of the change was,

to my own surprise, inappreciable with most reagents.
The final measurements, just as they were obtained, are set
down in the column under "Sensory Threshold " in Table I.

(b) Experimental Series II. This was executed in the sam~

village school, but upon the next thirty-six oldest children, the
tests being only in sound. Unlike the previous twenty-four,
these were examined collectively, the total interview lasting

about i i hours. The chief part of this time was devoted to

instructing and practising them, and to finding out what was
the lowest age fit for such a collective experiment. It became

eventually evident that no usable results could be obtained at

any rate from those below 552 years, and thereupon all those
under this age were excluded, leaving thirty-six for the real

tests.

The latter were carried out in the following manner. Every

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

248

SPEARMAN:

boy and girl was provided with a pencil and a piece of
and had simply to write down i or 2, accordingly as he

sidered the first or the second tone to be the highe

headmaster as well as the other teachers were present; a
prize was offered to stimulate attention, and energetic m
were found necessary to prevent cribbing. Ten test pai
tones were given at about the following eight differen

pitch, 50, 33, 26, 20, I6, Io, 6, and 3 v. d.; thus in al

child answered 80 times; in half the cases, the first to
really the higher, and vice versa.

The marking was done by fully considering each
whole paper, and then deciding as to what was the l

which he might be expected to give about eight right an

out of ten. This method has seemed to me in such cases the

most satisfactory, provided that the person marking has acquired the requisite experience by having previously examined
in a thorough manner a great number of similar reagents, and
provided the marking of the paper be done before receiving the
intellective gradings (or else there is a great danger of "selfsuggestion "). If this method be not adopted, recourse must
be had to some purely formula reckoning of errors.
Despite all precautions to secure reliable results, I was unable to quite convince myself that such uncultured children could

be treated adequately without elaborate individual attention.

(c) Experimental Series III. These experiments - confined
to Sight and Weight -were made in a preparatory school of
the highest class, which principally trained boys for Harrow.

To the Principals, themselves old Harrovians, my hearty thanks
are due for their kindness and cordial co-operation. As may
well be imagined, the social standing and general culture of the
reagents were the opposite extreme to that in the village school.

Unfortunately, these tests of Light and Weight had to be
arranged at a few hours' notice and consequently were carried
out under very unfavorable conditions. Out of the thirty-seven
boys constituting the school, only twenty-four could be present,

and of these again it was necessary to withdraw one from, the
results as being mentally too abnormal to be properly included

with the others. In the next place, no masters were in the

room after the first few minutes; in spite of the general excellent behavior, this relaxation of discipline must always be admitted to be a momentous circumstance. And finally, the
visual and muscular senses-never well adapted to collective
examination-had on this occasion to be tested with the apparatus intended only for individual work: the weights and the

cards were continually passed round and round by pairs,
ticketed i and 2 respectively; each boy then wrote down

which of the two he considered to be the heavier or darker.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENERAL INTELLIGENCE.'

249

It was impossible to control whether they all handled the apparatus in precisely the same manner, or even to insure that they
invariably gave their greatest possible attention to their tasks;
moreover, some were inevitably more favored than others as
regards intensity and evenness of illumination.
Owing to these facts, I brought away the impression that

the experiments were chiefly interesting as enhancing the

effect of Goodwill. For under better conditions, every reagent
can be brought pretty well to try his best; but here, on the
contrary, a wide range was observable in this respect, some
being very zealous while others were visibly indifferent.
(d) Experimental Series IV. This series, which was in

Sound only, took place in the same high class preparatory

school, but now the circumstances were as propitious as above
they were the reverse. Pitch is a sensory quality especially
susceptible of collective test. The experiments were arranged
and prepared with full deliberation. The entire school were

available with only the exception of the above mentioned

abnormal case, of one boy who had to leave the room before
the end of the hour, and two who were that day absent; thus

there were thirty-three complete results. Several masters

attended, so that the strictest discipline was maintained through-

out; there appeared no inclination to crib; every boy seemed
perfectly to understand what was required and to be intent

upon doing as well as possible. I am therefore inclined to

attach as much value to this series as to Series I; for the
cultured intelligence and long habit of examination possessed
by these boys should compensate the individual attention given
to the villagers.
The conditions entirely resembled those described in Series
II, except that only 48 final tests were made, 6 at each of the
following differences: 20, 15, I , 8, 6, 5, 3, and i v. d. The intellective grading was not received by me until long after the
sensory grading had been completed, so that the latter is free
from danger of self-suggestion.

(e). Experimental Series V. These were executed upon 26

male and female adults (thus bringing the total number of reagents throughout the present experiments to I23).

The method was individual and precisely the same as that
already described for Series I. But in arranging the composi-

tion of the reagents, instead of trying to obtain as homogeneous
a set as possible, it was here rather sought to include the greatest

variety; for although little can be proved in such a manner,
much can profitably be suggested.

4. The Estimation of "Intelligence."
As regards the delicate matter of estimating "Intelligence,"

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

SPEARMAN:

250

the guiding principle has been not to make any a priori
tions as to what kind of mental activity may be thus
with greatest propriety. Provisionally, at any rate, th
was empirically to examine all the various abilities havi
prima facie claims to such title, ascertaining their rela

one another and to other functions.

Four such different kinds of Intelligence have been introduced into the present work. First, there is that revealed in
the ordinary classification according to school order (based

here upon examinations). This clearly represents Present

Efficiency in such matters as Latin, Greek, Mathematics, etc.
Examples of this kind will be found in experimental series III

and IV.

The next sort of Intelligence derives from the same scho
order, but so modified as to exclude all influence of Age. Su

a corrected order may be provisionally accepted as representing,

not Proficiency, but Native Capacity. It has been arrived a
by taking the difference between each boy's rank in school
his rank in age. For obvious reasons, it has been preferred
consider the absolute and not the relative differences; a bo
for instance, who was 2oth by examination and 22nd by ag
would be placed just above one who was I5th by examinatio
and i6th by age, the former being two places and the latte
only one better than would have been expected with great
probability.
The resulting order is clearly but a first approximation, to
which we may apply any number of further corrections. For
our present purpose, the following has appeared the most that
can be practically required (and even this makes no appreciable
change in the final values obtained). Evidently, the top boy
is prevented from proving his full capabilities by want of competitors; let us suppose that he happens also to be the oldest;
then, on our above method, he will seem no better than a boy
of middle age and at the same time of middle school order; but
the latter will in reality always be found below many younger
than himself, compensating this by being also above about an
equal number of older ones; now, our top boy has not let himself be surpassed by any single one of his juniors, and therefore
would certainly have gone above a great many of his seniors,

had the school included such. The top boy's true position

may be roughly estimated by making him an extra allowance
of a number of places equal to the general mean deviation of
actual from average rank (which in this case comes to 5 places);
clearly, also, such allowance may with equal right be claimed
by the top boy, even if he does not happen to be the oldest;
further, the same correction is applicable in slighter degree to
the second boy, in still slighter to the third, and so on in a

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

("GENERAI, INTELLIGENCE. "

25I

rapidly diminishing curve up to the centre of the school.

For practical purposes, it has seemed sufficient to allow the
next four boys, 4, 3, 2, and i places respectively; naturally,
the whole of this correction must be repeated inversely for the
bottom end of the school. Though this explanation is rather
complicated, the correction is very easily carried out and, as
stated, its effect is hardly appreciable.
The third kind of Intelligence is that represented and measur-

able by the general impression produced upon other people.

This forms the basis of the common broad assortment of the

children by their teachers into "bright," "average," "dull"

respectively; and with such an assortment I have had to con-

tent myself for the elder children in the second series of experiments, while for those under 7 years of age, I have not obtained
any intellective grading at all.1 But for the more important
Series I, a list of relative rank was procured of satisfactory
completeness. It may here be noted that teachers, if directly
asked for such a detailed list, frequently begin by asserting it
to be impracticable. It will be generally found, however, that
if they be merely requested to pick out the brighest pupil of all,
they can do so without any great trouble; and when they are
next requested to select the brightest of the remainder, they are
still able to perform the desired feat; and so on, until the classification is complete.
The fourth and last sort of Intelligence which has here been
estimated is that known as common sense. To this end, the
oldest of the children of Series I was interviewed and interrogated
concerning her comrades in precisely the manner described
above, except that the criterion was not to be "brightness at
school work" but "sharpness and common sense out of school;"
and she seemed to have no great difficulty in forming her
judgments concerning the others, having, indeed, known them
all her life. As a check, and in order to eliminate undue partialities, it had been arranged that as she left the house, the
second oldest child should enter it and thus be able to give an
as far as possible independent list, since neither had beforehand
had any idea of what was wanted. Finally, a similar list was
obtained from the Rector's wife, who also had always lived in
this village; but her graduation is unfortunately incomplete and
therefore unusable, for she professed inability to pronounce
verdict upon some few children who had not come much under
her notice; as far as it went, it appeared perfectly homologous

with the other two lists.

'The day after these experiments I left the neighborhood of the

school.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

SPEARMAN:

252

5. Procedure in Deducing Results.
(a) Method of Correlation. So far this chapter has been occupied with obtaining estimates as to the reagents' respective
abilities in the several sensory and intellective functions. This
is an operation requiring the fullest use of psychological insight; and, therefore, based on the long preliminary investigation previously described, every effort has been made to ferret
out and evade all circumstances tending to make our little sample of facts appreciably misrepresentative of the real general
relations or psychologically superficial and misleading. But
the next portion of our problem is of a very definite objective

nature; we wish to ascertain how far the observed ranks in the

several abilities tend to correspond with one another; this, it is
believed, is no longer a task to be effected by exertions of psychological ingenuity; instead of constructing complex arbitrary
tables and plausible but more or less fanciful explanatory stories,

we now are in need of such a procedure as will impartially

utilize all our information in the demonstrably most complete
manner and will focus it to a plain quantitative value; for the
moment, psychology has to give way to mathematics.
Accordingly, all the more important correlations in the present work have been worked out by the best method hitherto
evolved, that of "product moments," as Pearson terms it;
only instead of using the actual measurements obtained for the
reagents' respective thresholds, the change has been made of
employing the numbers denoting their relative ranks; a full

explanation of the advantages of this modification may be found

in the article specially devoted to the topic (the chief being a

reduction of the probable error equivalent to doubling the
quantity of cases observed). Merely subsidiary results have

often been reckcned by the much more convenient method of
"rank differences," while a few correlations were for various
reasons not amenable to either of these more exact methods,
and therefore had to be worked out by Pearson's auxiliary
method or mine of " class averages" (the latter has generally
been preferred, on account of its smaller probable error). All
these are but different ways of more or less closely arriving at

the same measure of correlation, and thus all the results can be

freely compared with one another.
The method of "product moments," though sometimes involving lengthy calculations, is so simple in principle that it
can be worked by any moderately intelligent schoolboy. Explanation and illustration are given in the above article; here,
nothing more than the general formula can be stated, which is
as follows:

Sxy

r /Sx2.Sy2

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENBRAL INTELLIGENCE."

253

where x = any individual deviation from the general median as
regards one of the compared characteristics,
y = the deviation of the same individual as regards the other
characteristic,
Sxy = the sum of such products for all the individuals,
Sx = the sum of the squares of all the various values of x,
Sy -= the same for y,
and r = the required correlation.

(b) Elimination of Observational Errors. This necessitates

a further mathematical operation, which, however, is very brief

and does not involve anything more than elementary arithmetic. There are two formulae, one theoretical and the other
empirical:
rp,q,

) rpq Vrp,lp2.rq/lq,2
4/v/m1n.rp"qq - rp,q

and 2) rpq npq pq
V/mn- I

where rp,q, = the mean correlation between the various gradings for p and those for q,

rp,,p/2= the average correlation between one and another of these several independently obtained
series of values for p,

rq/q,/2 = the same as regards q,

rp,,q = the correlation of an amalgamated series of

measurements for p with an amalgamated series

for q,

m and n = the number of independent gradings for p and
q respectively,

and rpq = the required real correlation between the true
objective values of p and q.
It will be found exceedingly important to employ both formulae simultaneously, for they are independent of one another and
each has different sources of fallacy, so that the most essential
information is gained by a comparison between their respective

results.

When we say that a series of objects correlates entirely with

a second series, we do not assert that every set of measurements
of the one will absolutely coincide with those of the other, seeing

that discrepancies must inevitably arise from errors in measuring; we only mean that whatever all sets of measurements of

the one series have in common with each other will also be

found common to all measurements of the other series; then
either of the above formulae will exactly eliminate the observa

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

254

SPE5ARMAN:

tional discrepancies and thus present the correlation in

entirety.
But much more often the measurements for the same series

are connected with one another by more than connects them
with the measurements of the other series, and then the case is
ambiguous. Either the surplus really lies in the series measured, which is equivalent to saying that this series contains

elements not common to the other series and that the correla-

tion is to this extent incomplete; here, once more, both formulae will produce the properly corrected amount. Or, as is usual,

the excess of agreement between the measurements for the same

series may partly (or wholly) derive from their having the
same constant fallacies; and now it will be found that both
formulaw give a correction still in the right direction but too
small in quantity; further, this deficiency will be much greater
for the theoretical formula than for the empirical one, so that
when both formulae give the same result, we can assume that the
latter has not been appreciably falsified by any constant fallacy

common to the several sets of measurements for the same series.

Under special circumstances, the contrary case may occur of
the sets of measurements for the one series being connected
with each other by less than connects them with those of the
other series. This will happen whenever several sets of measurements supposed to be taken from the same lot of objects are
really procured from different ones and their several correspondences with the second series have arisen from independent
causes. In physical matters, this danger is not serious; if two

persons decide independently to measure a fossil cave-bear, they
are unlikely to make the mistake of going to different animals.

But in psychology it is otherwise; persons may honestly endeavor to appraise the same mental faculty, and yet, owing to
diversity of procedure and ignorance of organic uniformities,
they may really obtain measurements of quite independent
function. In such case, the sets of measurement, however accurate they may be, will show no correspondence with one
another; and if the functions are even only partially different,
the measurements will correspond with one another to that extent less than they would by reason solely of errors of observa-

tion.

The effect will be to falsify any corrections by the theoretical

formula, for the latter begins by assuming only one lot of objects to have been measured and therefore the correspondence
between the sets of measurements to be at least as great as
might be expected from their accuracy-an assumption generally fair enough, but under the special conditions delusively

reducing the denominator and thus producing a final value
proportionally too large. Now, this same fallacy affects cor

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

c GENERAL INTELLIGENCE. '

255

rections by the empirical formula in exactly the opposite direction; for the latter bases itself upon the fact that an amalgamation of several sets of measurements constantly emphasizes
whatever elements are common to them all and simultaneously
obliterates all that are not common; thus in the normal case of
only one lot of objects underlying the sets and determining
their correlations to the other series, amalgamation will continually raise the correlation towards its full amount; but if
there be more than one underlying lot of objects, each correlating with the other series independently, then amalgamation
will not emphasize but obliterate these independent influences
and consequently not raise but lower the correlation. Hence,
when several functions really corresponding with the second
series independently have been confounded together and taken
for different measurements of a single correspondence, the
.results, as corrected by the respective formulae will sharply
diverge. Conversely, if, when a double set of measurements
has been made the empirical corrective formula produces an
increase of correlation, then these sets of measurements may
be regarded as certainly deriving from some single common
faculty (any influences specific to each set of measurements
being theoretically subtracted from the faculty and viewed as
merely so many sources of observational error); and if the two
corrective formules lead to the same final amount of correlation,
then this latter concerns wholly and solely the commonfaculty.
Further, it is of great importance to remark that the last fal-

lacy, namely the case when measurements believed to be taken

from the same function really derive from different ones correlating with the other series independently, may, by the first cor-

rective formula, easily come to any values greater than I (and
therefore impossible, seeing that I represents entirety). By
the empirical formula, on the other hand, this can never occur;
for whether the sets of measurements be connected with one

another by either anything more or anything less than connects

them with the measurements of any other compared series,
then the correspondence between the two series will in both
cases be reduced and therefore must necessarily be less than I ;
in other words, the empirically corrected correlation can only

amount to full unity when all the sets of measurements for both
series have one common element and differ in every other systematic

constituent.

Fuller explanation and illustration are given in the article
devoted to the topic of measuring correlation.
(c) Elimination of Irrelevant Factors. This is the final opera1 Except for deviations due to mere chance, whose range will vary

with the probable error.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

256

SPEARMAN:

tion necessary to obtain a true result. Unlike the prece
one, it may often be altogether escaped; for if the con
are favorable and if the preliminary investigation ha

sufficiently thorough, the experiment need not be affected b

irrelevant factor of large enough magnitude sensibly to
the result. Here, also, the necessary mathematical work
been reduced to brief and elementary arithmetic; for mo

planation, the reader must again be referred to the

article.

If the irrelevant factor be connected with only one of the two

compared series, the equation is:

r'pq

pq - V/i - r2PV

where r'pq- the apparent correlation of p and q, the two

variants to be compared,
rpv - the correlation of one of the above variants with
a third and irrelevantly admitted variant v,

and rpq- the required real correlation between p and q,

after compensating for the illegitimate influence

of v.
If the irrelevant factor be connected with both series com-

pared, the equation becomes:

rpq = rtpq - rpvrqv

rpq -= /(I-r'pX)(I-r qv)

where all the terms have the same meaning as before.
CHAPTER V.

THE PRESENT RESULTS.

I. Method and Meaning of the Demonstration.
As the reader will have noticed, the formulae given at the
end of the previous chapter are equations whereby from several
observed correlations we are able to deduce a single true one.
This latter alone is of real scientific significance, and under the
ordinary unsystematic conditions - such as governed the great
majority of work reviewed in the second chapter - the actually
observed correlations will rarely be of much interest in their
primitive raw state; for after passing through the proper corrections, they would come forth transfigured in every conceivable manner; some would increase in size, some diminish, some
entirely disappear, and some even become inverted. Nevertheless, our true correlation in no way deserves the reproach
of being a theoretical abstraction, for it only represents the

limit to which the observed correlation itself will continually

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENERAL INTELLIGENCE."

257

approach as improvement is made in the experimental proced
ure; and not even the most perfect methodics can afford to di
pense with the formulae, seeing that these are the sole mea
by which the perfection may be adequately ascertained.
Our method of demonstration implies four distinct steps, all of
which are believed to be absolutely indispensable for work intend
ing to be more than merely suggestive. First, we must exact
determine the quantity of correlation actually observable, an
we must compare it with the probable error; then, if the former
be no more than about twice as large as the latter, the whol
experiment may indeed have produced a substantial negative
result, but cannot possibly warrant any positive conclusion
other than to suggest the desirability of extending the invest
gation until it acquires more evidential value; but if, on the
other hand, the observed correlation be four or five times greate
than the probable error, we may then consider a prima faci
case of correspondence to have been established and we may
legitimately go on to the corrective processes so as to bring ou
raw figure to its most probable real amount. Accordingly, th
second step will be to form an estimate of the errors in obser
ing the two series compared; for this purpose we must have
obtained two or more independent sets of measurements fo
each series, or at least must be acquainted with the relation
found between other such sets under sufficiently similar circum
stances; the influence of these errors can then be eliminated b
the formulae given on page 253, and at the same time an opinion
can be formed as to the presence or not of the grave fallaci

discussed on pages 253 ff. The third proceeding is to loo

for any factors irrelevantly admitted (or, more rarely, excluded); any suspicions must be carefully verified in succes-

sion, and, if necessary, employment must be made of th

eliminating equations given on page 256. Finally, we have to
critically review the whole argument, paying particular atten
tion to such disturbing factors as have not been disposed of
very satisfactorily; in this way we come to a final estimate, n
only as to the most probable amount of real correspondence
but also as to the degree of confidence to which our evidence
entitled; for these two things are by no means always paralle
a high apparent correlation often having but small evidenti

value and vice versa.

A few words may now be said concerning the eventual meaning attachable to the result which we hope to obtain. To put
it briefly, the usual direction of inquiry is in the present work
reversed. The customary procedure consists in determining

some matter of research subjectively, say, "Perception,"
"Attention," " Imagination," " Fatigue," etc., and then

ascertaining its relation to other similarly pre-determined psyJOURNAI--IO

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

258

SPEARMAN:

choses or neuroses. Here, on the contrary, although every

effort has been made to render the mental phenomena as unequivocal and significant as possible, yet in the beginning not
the least note is taken of any psychological import beyond such
as is barely necessary to define the subject of discussion in the

most positive and objective manner; while the structure of
language necessitates the continued use of such terms as Discrimination, Faculty, Intelligence, etc., these words must be
understood as implying nothing more than a bare unequivocal
indication of the factual conditions of experiment. For the
moment we are only inquiring how closely the values gained in
the several different series coincide with one another, and all
our corrections are intended to introduce greater accuracy, not
fuller connotation; the subjective problems are wholly reserved
for later investigation. It is no new thing thus elaborately to
deal with and precisely measure things whose real nature is
concealed from view; of this nature, for instance, is obviously
the study of electricity, of biology, and indeed of all physical
science whatever.

Let us, then, consider the extent of connection between two
series of things implied by this sole fact of their presenting a
numerical correlation with one another; such a correspondence,
when beyond the range of mere chance coincidence, may be
forthwith assumed to indicate and measure something common
to both series in question. Such a community may often consist of a definite so-called "substance;" A's changes of wealth
will show some correlation with those of B, if both possess
some shares in the same stock. Or, on the other hand, the
community may derive from a more complicated interaction of

forces; thus, the weather is supposed to correlate with the
state of the spots on the sun. But this distinction is superficial even in physical matters; thingness may well be an indispensable crutch for popular thought, and indeed in metaphysics
becomes a serious enough topic, but it has no place in strict
natural science and still less in psychology, where fast limit has
never been securely traceable between things, qualities, and

conditions.

But the same simple mathematical formulae which have

brought us so far will take us yet farther. As from several
sets of inaccurate measurements it has been found possible to
arrive at the accurate correlation of the two real series, so

now in a similar manner from any number of real series we can

proceed on to dealing exclusively and precisely with any element that may be found common to these series; from ascertaining the inter-correlations of, say, auditory discrimination,
visual discrimination, the capacity for learning Greek, and
that for playing the piano, we can arrive at estimating the

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENERAL INTELLIGENCE. "

259

correspondence of whatever may be common to the firs

faculties with whatever may be common to the sec
By combining such correlations of higher order, it i
to execute any required amount of elimination and
so that eventually a dissociation and exactness may

duced into psychology such as can only be comp

quantitative chemical analysis; even in the present w
hoped to obtain results of sufficient fineness to be in
of local conditions of experiment, and therefore to b
verifiable by any other workers. All the time, the
discovered by us will wholly retain their impartial
character; however accurately we may learn the dis
of community, it will remain as a later and very diff
to detect and analyze its psychical nature. But we s
that the successive positive ascertainment of objectiv
continually reduces and simplifies the thinkable ex
hypotheses, so that practically our method of invest
bringing us towards the introspective psychologica
also-and perhaps in the end by the shortest route.
2. Correspondence between the Discriminations and the

Intelligences.

(a) Experimental Series I. We will begin by dealing

with the subject broadly and considering the general average

correlation between the various forms of Discrimination and

those of Intelligence. To establish our prima facie case, we

note that Discrimination has been tested in three senses and

that Intelligence has been graded by three different persons;
thus we have nine correlations which, if no correspondence
exist, should all be small (about half of them under o.og) and
approximately as many should be inverse as direct. Far from
this being the case, we find that every single one is direct,
that the smallest amounts to 0.25, and that the average comes
to 0.38 with a probable error of about only 0.02. Now, a correlation thus more than nineteen times the size of its probable
error would not occur by mere accident in millions of trials, so
that chance, as a possible cause of the apparent correlations, may

at once be put completely out of court. Our result has thus
made good its right to further elaboration.
But when we consequently proceed to discount the errors ot
measurement, it unfortunately becomes clear that our data are
far from being adequate for the purpose; we have, indeed, a
duplicate set of observations for Common Sense, but none for
School Cleverness nor for any of the Sensory Discriminations.
The excuse for the deficiency lies to some degree in practical
difficulties, but still more in the fact that at the time of the experiments I was only just beginning to realize the necessity of

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

260

SPEARMAN:

such duplication. In default, then, of better informati
other errors will provisionally be taken as being ab
same size as those for Common Sense (later on we shal
opportunity of partially checking this assumption); on
basis, an elimination of the observational errors by our
theoretical formula brings the required correlation to

This result can now be compared with that given

second formula; for this purpose we utilize the fact tha
mon Sense and School Cleverness prove to be not very di
criteria, so that all three lists may be used as measurem

practically the same intellectual faculty; if we accor
amalgamate these three lists into one, the latter shows an
average correlation with the Discriminations amounting to 0.44

and our required correlation comes to 0.54,2 or somewhat

smaller than by the other way. Such a decrease by the empirical as compared with the theoretical formula could be produced by two causes: either the estimation of School Cleverness
might have been more accurate than those for Common Sense,
or else there could have occurred the fallacy a priori feared by
us, namely that the three critics had been warped by the same
prejudices and therefore not able to judge with sufficient independence of one another. As, however, the total divergence
only amounts to o.o6, we can conclude that neither of the
above disturbances can have existed to any appreciable degree,
and we might well ascribe even the small apparent difference
to mere chance variation; but to be on the safe side we will
adopt the lower value, 0.54.
We next pass to the inquiry into irrelevant factors and will

commence with the conspicuous one of Sex. This to all ap-

pearance manifests a connection with both Discrimination and
Intelligence, and therefore might conceivably be the sole cause
of the two latter being congruous with one another. But closer
inspection alters the aspect of affairs; for while Sex and Discrimination only show a correlation with one another to the

~~~~1 0.38

, o.60
Vo.64Xo.6
2 The two forms of intelligence coincide to the extent of 0.84, so that

the equation becomes approximately /2+842X 44- 38 - 0.54

^,/JV2+o.4X o.44 - .38 0.54.

V2+o.842- I
Even if we neglect the slight discrepancy between the two sorts of

intelligence, the result will not be very different, for

4-3Xo.44-0-38 = 0.53. Note that as we have here an amalgamavs-I

tion for only one of the two compared serie
instead of the fourth root of the number o

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

?' GENERAL INTELLIGENCE. "

26r

extent of 0.26 (after correction for errors), they respectively
correlate with Intelligence to the amounts of o.59 and o.54; so
that the true correlation between Sex and Discrimination comes

to -0.o7,1 that is to say it entirely disappears. Thus it would
seem that the correspondences of Discrimination and Intelligence with Sex are in no degree the causes but merely effects

of their correspondence with one another and that thefluctuating
differences of Sensory Discrimination observable in connection with
Sex at the various stages of growth are chiefly and perhaps altogether a mere consequence of similarly fluctuating differences in

their Intelligence. This hypothesis tallies well with other indications; in the experiments of Gilbert, for instance, as to the
most characteristic discrepancies between boys and girls at the
various ages, the two senses tested (visual and muscular) present an almost identical progress, as if both were depending on

some common influence. The same conclusion can be more

directly derived from the fact that either the boys or the girls,
taken separately, present correlational values very similar to the

above; but such a subdivision so reduces the number of conjoined cases that the probable error becomes too formidable for
the attainment of sufficiently regular results. Hence it has
been thought both permissible and advantageous to throw the
boys and girls together into the one collective experiment.
The next obvious irrelevant factor is that of Age, which apparently exhibits correlations with Discrimination and Intelligence of 0.37 and 0.42 respectively. But as regards the former,
first, the true value obtained in the same way as before descends

down to only o. I8,2 thereby not indeed this time disappearing
but still coming almost within reach of some bias in the operation of grading; possibly, then, the connection of Age with
Discrimination is at least in the main, like that of Sex, no more
than an effect of their common correspondence with Intelligence; this would accord with the strange phenomenon noted
above, that Intelligence appears temporarily to diminish about
the eleventh year, for precisely the same occurs to their powers
of Sensory Discrimination (a fact first pointed out by Gilbert

and noticeable in the present experiments also). To turn to

the other above indicated correspondence, that between Age
and Intelligence, all those who furnished me with their personal estimation of the children's comparative intellect had
been particularly requested to do so entirely regardless of Age,
and they had anticipated no difficulty on this head declaring
1 0.26-o.59Xo054

^/(I--o.592) ( - 0

2 0.37 -0.42 X0.54

/(I - 0.422)(I -o.542)

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

262

SPEARMAN :

that their opinions were naturally formed quite independently
of any such consideration. But we have seen good reason for
being very strict in this respect, and when we actually examine
the figures, the observed deviations are often far greater than
can be attributed to mere chance; from seven to ten years it is
the little ones who are favored and to the large extent of 0.65,
which is, however, in this case only three times the abnormally
big probable error; 1 but from ten to fourteen the above correlation of 0.42 is found in the opposite direction and upon being
corrected only descends to 0.38,2 which is more than seven
times its probable error and therefore would not occur by mere

coincidence in many thousand times. Thus we are impelled to
believe, either that judgment of Intelligence is to a great though

unconscious extent biased by consideration of Age, or else that
there is a stage of development somewhere near the eleventh
year where Intelligence temporarily declines; in connection
herewith we have the curious fact that from about eleven to

twelve years there appears to ensue a suspension in the growth
of children's heads. Returning finally to our main topics with
these two values, o. I8 and 0.38, the corrected correlation be-

tween Discrimination and Intelligence now comes to the slightly

reduced amount of o.52.8
Passing to the next irrelevant factor, Practice, this influence

has in the third chapter shown itself to be only moderate as regards distinguishing Light, and still smaller as concerns Weight;

moreover, there is no reason to suppose that the children dif-

fered appreciably from one another in their amount of previous

practice with these two kinds of activity. But in the matter of
Sound all this is reversed, for even the most homogeneous
school presents a wide diversity of musical education, and we
have already seen that such circumstance is of enormous influence. Taking the quantitative estimates given on page 231, in
conjunction with the average and its mean deviation in Table I,
the correspondence of Discrimination and Practice can be reckoned out to probably amount in such a school to something like
o.70. This very large factor must therefore be eliminated be1 This result depends upon only one short set of observations; also

no detailed rank had been furnished, but merely that favorite but par-

ticularly bad classification into "bright," "average," and "dull."
2 0.42-o.54X o. I8

0.38
(I - 0.54) (I - o.8)--.38

This method of correcting three inter-correlated terms in succession
beginning with the smallest of them, though far from being theoretically exact, nevertheless appears sufficiently applicable to the large
majority of actual cases including the present one.
8 0.54- o.38Xo. 18

V'(I--382)(-o.I82) 0.52

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENERAL INTELLIGENCE."

263

fore we can hope to obtain an approximately true result. As
it only affects Auditory Discrimination, the total average will
thereby be finally increased to about o.58.
So far, we have broadly taken the general average correlation

between all the kinds of Discrimination and those of Intelligence.

Let us next briefly consider the individual relations between
the several specific sensory and intellective faculties. Common

Sense and School Cleverness present practically the same

amounts, their raw correlations being o.39 and o.36 respectively, so that there appears no object in treating these sepa-

rately. The various sensory departments show apparently

much larger discrepancies: for Weight, which has a raw corre-

lation of o. 34, after correction we eventually get o.43; for Light,

with a raw correlation of 0.44, we come to o.58; and for Sound,
with a raw correlation of 0.37, we arrive at no less than 0.71.
To this disparity, however, no great evidential value can be attached, until more positive estimates have been obtained as to
the errors of measurement; the above rank might really only
mean that the accuracy of experimentation had been least in
the thresholds for Weight and greatest in those for Pitch.
Lastly comes the process of reviewing the whole argument.
Clearly enough, it has in many respects been of a rough character. The arbitrarily assumed observational errors for School
Cleverness and for Discrimination were but inadequately checked

in the former case and not at all in the latter; while the irrelevant influence of previous practice on Auditory Discrimination

was based upon solid but too general data. Also, there is

always the danger that other unsuspected irrelevant factors
may exist in harmful magnitude; on this head, however, the

precautions taken appear fairly adequate; chapter III only

shows the results of the preliminary investigation as regards
those factors which finally proved most formidable, but a great
number of others have been thoroughly examined and their influence has been found to be inappreciable for our present purpose. Among all these sources of inaccuracy, it will be

manifest how insignificant is here the r6le of the probable error

of the raw main correlation (0.02); thus, though the reagents
were only twenty-four in all, it would have been worse than
useless to augment their number at the expense of correctness
in other respects; for the present, increased precision must be
chiefly sought by other means. To sum up, the most likely
value for the average correlation between the Discriminations
and the Intelligences comes to about o.58, but this final con-

clusion must be considered as having a large total probable

error, say, o. o.

(b) Experimental Series II. On first inspection, the results
here would seem diametrically opposed to our last ones, the

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

264

SPEARMAN :

correlation turning out to be on the minus side, so th
crimination would appear correlated to the extent of o.
with Intelligence but with Stupidity.
But we again notice that both Intelligence and Discrim
are irrelevantly correlated with Age, and to the large a
of 0.69 and o.8i respectively.2 On applying the correctiv
mula, the true correlation turns round to o+0.4I, where
paradox is readily resolved into a result under the circum
perfectly normal; we should expect the amount to be
than in the former experimental series, because the o
tional errors must have been greater and have required
compensation than before, whereas we have given the s
Thus it is once more evident that the influence of irrelevant

factors, though sometimes of moderate magnitude (as in the
preceding series) may at other times assume sugh dimensions
as to wholly reverse the conclusion. Nor would such an effect
be in the least diminished by increasing the number of reagents
experimented upon.
Except for this lesson concerning the danger of irrelevant
factors, there is little information to be gleaned from the present

series; for while the observed correlation is only -0.25, the
probable error comes to no less than o. 8; in other words,
such a correlation would turn up about every third time, either
when no correspondence existed at all, or when there really
was one twice as large. Hence we see that though a short
series of cases may be managed in such a way that the r6le of
the probable error becomes insignificant, yet this is not neces-

sarily so; when the data are gained in the customary unscientific
manner, the results of these brief experiments are worthless for

persons versed in correlational methodics and delusive for those
who are not so.

(c) Experimental Series III. Here the probable error has

been reduced to more reasonable dimensions (o.o6 for the
average of two correlations); also the disturbances from Sex
and Age have been eliminated. But on the other hand (as we
have seen on page 248), the sensory tests were so unsatisfactory
that the attenuation by errors must be estimated of enormous

magnitude. Quite accordingly, the observed correlations of
Intelligence with Visual and Tactual Discrimination are no
more than 0.13 and 0.I2 respectively. Upon this diminutive

basis we cannot attempt to pile the very large and vague corrections that would be necessary.

Thus we see that an inadequate way of testing the reagents,

lThe raw correlation is -0.25.

2 The raw correlations are 0.55 and - 0.65 respectively.

8a 0.39 - 0.69 X (- o.8r) +

/( - o.692) (i - o.8I2)

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

"GENERAL INTELLIGENCE. "6

265

whether due to circumstances, want of skill, or undu
will so increase the attenuation by errors that the r
vable correlation is brought down to a vanishing min

This effect, so far from being remedied by incre

range of the experiments and the number of cases, w
inevitably be augmented thereby.
The principal information to be gleaned from this
that the correspondence between Discrimination and

gence cannot well be appreciably due to Zeal, for t

faculty had upon this occasion become the paramount

tiating influence.

(d) ExperimentalSeries IV. On this occasion circum

were as favorable to accuracy of experimentation (see
as in the last two cases they had been the reverse. A
ingly, we find that Discrimination correlates with Tal
four branches of study, Classics, French, English, an
matics, by an average of 0.51 with a probable error

0.03. This proportion of over 17 to I is amply suff

warrant us in proceeding to determine the real corres
with considerable precision.
We will again take first the errors of measuremen

gards Intelligence, there was no difficulty in obta
required data; for the gradings were based upon the
school examinations, so that if several of these be tak
taneously into consideration, each will constitute a suf

independent set of measurements. The errors pro

smaller than those in the first experimental series; on
nation paper correlates with another in the same bra
study by an average of 0.86; and one total examinati
lates with another total examination by an average o
that whereas before we had to make a compensation
we now only require those of 7% and 2%. From this
appear that examination papers form a test that is f
constant and free from accidental errors of judgment
teachers' subjective impression as to the "brightness"
wards; but still this only refers to the reliability of t
process and does not prejudice the question to be sub

discussed as to whether the kinds of intelligence t
different and of unequal value. As concerns the g

Discrimination, unfortunately the same impediment ag
trated the attainment of several independent sets of
tions, so that we once more have no precise measure
pensation; we shall therefore have to make the same free
estimate as before. Correcting, then, for both Intelligence and
Discrimination, we get a true value of o.69.'
1

o.5I

/o.8o.6 X o64 .69

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

266

SPEARMAN:

Proceeding next to irrelevant factors, these appear
been reduced in the present series to such a minimum
there is no more any necessity for theoretical correct
matter of Sex does not again come into the question, s

school is only of boys. Nor is Age this time a distu

for its correlation with Discrimination works out to the insen-

sible amount of -0.07. The latter circumstance completely

disposes of another possible objection, for it might be urged
against Experimental Series I that Age is by no means identical
with stage of Growth, some children being more precocious
than others, so that our correction to eliminate the former

factor does not necessarily suffice to nullify variety in the latter

one; hence, it might be argued, the whole correspondence
between Intelligence and Discrimination could conceivably be
due merely to the brighter children being also more forward
with their senses. But though it must certainly be admitted
that Age and Growth do not always keep level with one another,

yet they at any rate correspond to the extent that when the
former has ceased to exercise any influence at all the latter also
must have become entirely inoperative; and as throughout the
school the older boys do not in the least surpass the younger
ones in Discrimination of Pitch, we may safely say that their
faculty in this respect no longer depends to the smallest degree
either on their Age or even on the stage of their Growth.
Still it may be interesting to know what would have occurred
had the school lists not been artificially modified, but allowed
to retain the factor of Age. In such case, the correlation
comes to only o. 45.1 Thus by eliminating Age we had increased
the correlation from 0.45 to 0.69; but to obtain such a rise it
can easily be calculated that we must remove an irrelevant
factor amounting to about o.76;2 now, in the unmodified lists
the actual correspondence of Age with Class Order turns out to
be precisely this amount. Thus it would appear that the influence of Age was wholly irrelevant; not actual Proficiency but
Native Capacity is the factor directly correlated with Discrimination; our apparently somewhat theoretical modification of the
original school order was no empty abstraction but had after
all a solid enough basis in present fact; if with regard to the
educational curriculum it merely represented future possibilities,

yet in other directions it showed itself to correspond with

already efficient powers.

It is now also evident that the whole process of modifying
1

0.33

/o.86 X 0.64 045
2

0.45

0.69 = V ,so that x = 0.76.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENERAL INTELLIGENCE."

267

the school lists could have been avoided; we could have left
them in their raw state and simply have eliminated the irrelevant factor of Age by our usual formula; in this way, indeed,
the theoretical precision would have been far greater, for our
artificial treatment of the lists is only even approximately cor-

rect when Age is a paramount influence in deciding school

place, and if applied, say, to university students, would produce
an improper decrease (never increase) in the observed correlations; but practically the advantage is generally the other way,
as in the present case, for the above theoretical incorrectness is
more than compensated by a reduction gained in the probable
error, owing to our being able to actually observe more of the
correlation and thus leaving less to obtain by calculation.
As regards possible irrelevant correspondence with Practice,
the present experimental series is again favorably situated; for
though this factor has its usual large influence upon Discrimination of Pitch, there are in this case some positive data wherewith to measure it. Out of the thirty-three children it was
ascertained that twenty-two were taking lessons in music, and
these not unnaturally showed a much finer Sensitivity (a

median of 2.3 v. d. as against one of 5 v. d.). We can therefore reject the eleven not learning music, thus confining the
experiment to reagents on nearly the same level as concerns
Practice; upon doing so, the correlation makes a further rise
to o.78.1 Or else we can work out the correlation of Discrimination with Music Lessons, and then remove this irrelevant
factor by means of our formula; thereby we arrive at a similar

value.

Let us now sum up thi3 fourth series. With respect to the

correlations of Discrimination with the School Studies separately

we have arrived at an average of 0.78, of which figure 0.57
has been actually observed; to this aggregate 0.89 is contribted by Classics, 0.88 by French, 0.73 by English, and 0.6I by
Mathematics; here the order may be considered as well enough
evidenced, the ambiguity present in the first series having disappeared, since the observational errors have been calculated
separately for each study. The correlation of Discrimination

with the Total School Ability can be calculated with equal

ease; the average raw correlation is 0.68, while the successive
Total School Orders correlate with one another by 0.95, so that
the corrected required correlation becomes o.87.2
In this series we have had the good fortune, not only to ob-

~~~~~1 0.57

/o.86 X 064 .78
o.68

o.64
0.95 = 0.87
/o.64
X X0.95.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

268

SPEARMAN:

tain reliable estimates of almost all the perturbing influ
but even to eliminate them in practice so that an averag
less than o.68 can be actually observed. In the further
culation the only value that cannot be approximately r
upon is that of the errors in measuring Discrimination
even this cannot well be very much smaller than the a
here adopted and, as is subsequently proved, cannot po
be much larger. The existence of other sources of falla
lurking, either to reduce or to still further augment th
cannot of course ever be categorically disproved; but at

rate a careful search has been made and has so far failed to

reveal them. The whole system of results exhibits such regula
unconstrained compliance with the definite laws governing cor

relations (and also present such other remarkable uniformities to

be discussed later on) that they appear to offer every guarante

of being perfectly normal.

The correlational value is, however, considerably larger than
that found for the same sense in Experimental Series I. The
readiest explanation of this discrepancy would appear to lie in
a fact which I have often had occasion to notice, namely that
when the reagents are very unpractised in any form of sensory
Discrimination. the latter correlates with their Intelligence by

a much smaller amount.

(e) Conclusions. On the whole, then, the results of all four
experimental series appear sufficiently concordant with one
another. Whenever we have succeeded in obtaining a fairly
pure correlation between Sensory Discrimination and Life Intelligence, we have found it amount to a very considerable
value. In the case of Pitch, it came to as high as 0.87. Very
possibly other discriminative functions would show similar

results, while some would prove much more specific (and

usually dependent on factors peripheral to the nervous system).

3. Correspondence between General Discrimination and
General Intelligence.

Up to now, we have only discussed the correspondence of
the various Intelligences with the various sensory activities,
Hearing, Sight, Touch, etc. Such isolated facts are interesting
enough, but quite otherwise important is the relation of any

common and essential element in the Intelligences to any common

and essential element in the Sensory Functions. For brevity, we
will term these common elements "General Intelligence" and

"General Discrimination," but always with the reservations

made in the first section of this chapter.

Curiously, this more general correspondence can in the

present case be settled with much greater precision than was

possible for the specific relations. This is due to our now

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENERAL INTELLIGENC." 2'

269

having adequate data wherewith to measure the errors of observation, seeing that all the experimentally obtained gradings
of specific Discrimination constitute so many one-sided inde-

pendent attempts to grade the General Discrimination; the

amount of observational error will be quantitatively revealed
in the correlations between one grading and another.

(a) The Village School. Here our calculation is as follows.

The average of the nine correlations between the Intelligences
and the Discriminations comes, as we have seen, to o.38;1 the
two kinds of intellective gradings correlate with one another
by an average of 0.55; and the three gradings in Discrimination do so by o.25.8 Therefore by the theoretical formula the

true correlation between General Intelligence and General

Discrimination comes to

0.38

,o?55Xo ?25 = I.OI.
o. 55X o.25
Checking this by the second or empirical method, we find that
on taking an amalgamation of the three intellective gradings
with an amalgamation of the three gradings in Discrimination,

the correlation rises to 0.66. Therefore the true correlation

between General Intelligence and General Discrimination comes

in this way to

*/3 X 0.66-0.38 _ 4
A3 - I

This again may be further checked by taking our
tion two instead of three lists at a time; in this w
nine different correlations which present an avera

that our required result now becomes o.96.8 Th

average again gives us as nearly as possible I.oo.

Thus we arrive at the remarkable result that the com

essential element in the Intelligences wholly coinci

common and essential element in the Sensory Function

(b) The High Class School. Here, also, the chil

tested in the three senses, but unfortunately, as w
the results for Light and Weight are not seriousl
that we no longer have sufficient material for co

"General" Discrimination.

'These correlations are here taken as actual measurements, and
therefore are obviously required raw, not corrected; the correction
then issues from their joint product according to the formula.
2 This value is preciselythe same as that found for adults: seeTable V.

3 ^2~X 0.55 - 0.38

= 0.96

4As far as they go, they indicate results entirely similar to those

above.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

SPEARMAN:

270

This default, however, has been made good by wha
to be a very happy substitute. Our main correlations have
dealt with reagents all undergoing musical instruction, and I

have kindly been furnished with a complete order of their rela-

tive abilities in this department. Musical talent has always
been recognized as being not so much an intellective as a sensory function; whole nations appear almost devoid of it, without therefore showing themselves any less intelligent; lunatic
asylums, on the contrary, often contain a surprising share of
the faculty. We will, then, take this as our second sensory
function, will note whether it presents any community with
Discrimination of Pitch, and if so will compare this common
element with that obtaining between the intellective functions.
As regards the first point, it may be noted that hitherto very
conflicting opinions have been stoutly maintained; the great
majority of writers have held Musical Talent and Pitch Discrimination to be very intimately connected and even go so far
as to directly term the discriminative power "musical sensitiveness;" while a few, but including perhaps the ablest judges,

flatly deny any such correspondence whatever. The actual

facts would at first sight seem to lie wholly on the side of the
former tenet, seeing that the correlation works out to the substantial amount of 0.40 (or about 0.63, when corrected for
errors). Next, these two auditory functions correlate with
the Intelligences by 0.57 and 0.55 respectively, and the latter

correlate with one another to the amount of 0.7I. Thus the

relation between the element common to the two former and

that common to the four latter will be given by
0.56
/=- 1.04

Vo.40 X 0.71I

We can now check the result by
find that the amalgamated order
faculties correlates with the amal
the four Intelligences by 0.72; so

comes to

/8 X 0.72 - 0.56
4/-- 0= o.96

Taking as usual the mean,l we again reach a final correlat
of precisely i.oo, and therefore once more must conclude
the element common to the sensory activities also wholly
cides with that common to the intelligences.

1 If this small difference of value between the theoretical and em

cal results be minutely investigated, it can be clearly proved to
solely attributable to mere chance, as indeed might well be expe

from its small dimensions.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

"' GENERAL INTELLIGENCE."

27I

Before passing, it may be remarked that thus after all those
were virtually in the right who maintained Musicality and
Pitch Discrimination to have no correspondence with one
another; for though a correspondence really does exist, yet it
is not to the smallest degree of the specific character contem-

plated by those who talk of "musical sensitivity." It must

here also be noted that this surprising intellectuality of musical
talent by no means annihilates the many well-evidenced phenomena seeming to indicate the contrary; one fact cannot
destroy another, and any apparent conflict merely proves our
imperfect acquaintance with their true nature.
(c) Practical Verification of the Argument. The conclusion
above arrived at is so important and the method of argument is
so new, that I have endeavored to reproduce analogous circumstances artificially, so that any one may easily test any portion
of the reasoning.
The main argument was repeated as follows. A target was
constructed of a great many horizontal bands, numbered from

top to bottom. Then a man shot successively at a particular

series of numbers in a particular crder; clearly, the better the
shot, the less numerical difference between any number hit and
that aimed at; now, just as the measurement of any object is
quite appropriately termed a "shot " at its real value, so, conversely, we may perfectly well consider the series of numbers
actually hit in the light of a series of measurements of the num-

bers aimed at. When the same man again fired at the same
series, he thereby obtained a new and independent 1 series of
measurements of the same set of objects. Next, a woman had
the same number of shots at some set numbers in a similar

manner. If, then, our above reasoning and formulae are correct, it should be possible, by observing the numbers hit and
working out their correlations, to ascertain the exact resemblance between the series aimed at by the man and woman respectively. In actual fact, the sets of numbers hit by the man
turned out to correlate with those hit by the woman to the extent of 0.52; but it was noted that the man's sets correlated
with one another to 0.74, and the woman's sets with one another to 0.36; hence the true correspondence between the set
aimed at by the man and that aimed at by the woman was not
the raw 0.52, but
0.52

'o. 74 X o.36 = 1.00

that is to say, the two persons had fired at exactly the same
series of bands, which was really the case. I repeated this ex1 Provided, of course, that there be no appreciable constant error.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

SPEARMAN:

272

periment, testing three times by the first or theoretical fo

and four times by the empirical one; by both metho
average came to just upon I.oo, with a mean variation a
and below of precisely similar dimensions to those in o
stances of Discrimination and Intelligence. Thus the exp
mental justification of our method of argumentation w
complete as could well be desired.

(d) Conclusion. On the whole, then, we reach the

foundly important conclusion that there really exists a som

that we may provisionally term " General Sensory Discr
tion " and similarly a " General Intelligence," and furthe

the functional correspondence between these two is not appre

less than absolute.

Besides its intrinsic value, such a general theorem has the
enormous advantage over the specific results of the last section
of being independent of any particular conditions; it has noth-

ing to do with the procedure selected for testing Discrimination

and Intelligence, nor even with the accuracy of its execution,
nor indeed even with the homogeneousness of the experimental

subjects; if correct, the proof should be reproducible in all
times, places, and manners -on the sole condition of adequate

methodics.

4. Universal Unity of the Intellective Function.

In view of this community being discovered between such

diverse functions as in-school Cleverness, out-of-school Common

Sense, Sensory Discrimination, and Musical Talent, we need
scarcely be astonished to continually come upon it no less paramount in other forms of intellectual activity. Always in the
1

present experiments, approximately, rpq = I.
Vrpp rqq
I have actually tested this relation in twelve pairs of such

groups taken at random, and have found the average value to
be precisely I.oo for the first two decimal places with a mean
deviation of only 0.05. All examination, therefore, in the different sensory, school, or other specific intellectual faculties,
may be regarded as so many independently obtained estimates
of the one great common Intellective Function.
Though the range of this central Function appears so uni-

versal, and that of the specific functions so vanishingly minute,

the latter must not be supposed to be altogether non-existent.
'Where rpq = the mean of the correlations between the members of
the one group p with the members of the other
group q,

rpp = the mean of the inter-correlations of the members of
the group p among themselves,
and rqq = the same as regards group q.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENERAL INTELLIGENCE."

273

We can always come upon them eventually, if we sufficientl
narrow our field of view and consider branches of activity
closely enough resembling one another. When, for instance
in this same preparatory school we take on the one side Lat
translation with Latin grammar and on the other side Fren
prose with French dictation, then our formula gives us a ne
result; for the two Latin studies correlate with the French on
by an average of 0.59, while the former correlate together b

0.66 and the latter by o.7I; so that the element common
the Latin correlates with the element common to the Frenc

by 0.59 = o.86 only.

Vo.66 X o.7I
That is to say, the two common elements by no means coincide
completely this time, but only to the extent of o.862 or 74%;1
so that in the remaining 26%, each pair must possess a community purely specific and unshared by the other pair.2
We therefore bring our general theorem to the following
form. Whenever branches of intellectual activity are at all dissimilar, then their correlations with one another appear wholly
due to their being all variously saturated with some common fun-

damental Function (orgroup of Functions). This law of the Uni-

versal Unity of the Intellective Function is both theoretically and

practically so momentous, that it must acquire a much vaster
corroborative basis before we can accept it even as a general
principle and apart from its inevitable eventual corrections and
limitations. Discussion of the subjective nature of this great
central Function has been excluded from the scope of the present work. But clearly, if it be mental at all, it must inevitably
become one of the foundation pillars of any psychological system claiming to accord with actual fact - and the majority of
prevalent theories may have a difficulty in reckoning with it.
Of its objective relations, the principal is its unique universality, seeing that it reappears always the same in all the divers
forms of intellectual activity tested; whereas the specific factor
seems in every instance new and wholly different from that in
all the others. As regards amount, next, there seems to be an
immense diversity; already in the present examples, the central factor varies from less than 1/5 to over fifteen times the

size of the accompanying specific one. But all cases appear

equally susceptible of positive and accurate measurement; thus
we are becoming able to give a precise arithmetical limitation

1 The influence of an element is measured by the square of its correlational value. See "The Association between Two Things."
2 Of course this specific community is further resolvable into natural
talent and favoring circumstances of which factors the latter may often
be paramount.
JOURNAIL-I1

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

274

SPEARMAN:

to the famous assertion that "at bottom, the Gr

ever the same kind of thing."
Finally, there is the exceedingly significant fact
central Function, whatever it may be, is hardly anyw
prominent than in the simple act of discriminating t
identical tones; here we find a correlation exceeding
dicating the central Function to be more than four t
than all the other influences upon individual differ
Not only the psychical content but also the externa
of Sensory Discrimination offer a most valuable simp
it is a single monotonous act, almost independent o
vious general education, memory, industry, and ma
factors that inextricably complicate the other functi
over, the specific element can to a great extent be re
inated by varying and combining the kind of test.
reasons, Discrimination has unrivalled advantages fo
gating and diagnosing the central Function.
5. The Hierarchy of the Intelligences.

The Theorem of Intellective Unity leads us to c

corollary proceeding from it logically, testing it crit
at once indicating some of its important practical u
corollary may be termed that of the Hierarchy of t
Intelligences.
For if we consider the correspondences between t
branches of school study, a very remarkable uniform

observed. English and French, for instance, agree

another in having a higher correlation with Classics
Mathematics. Quite similarly, French and Mathemat
in both having a higher correlation with Classics th
English. And the same will be found to be the case
other pair is compared with the remainder. The wh
forms a perfectly constant Hierarchy in the followi

Classics, French, English, and Mathematics. This

regularity becomes especially astonishing when we r
minuteness of the variations involved, for the four
have average correlations of 0.77, 0.72, 0.70, and 0.6
tively.
When in the same experimental series we turn to the Discrimination of Pitch, we find its correlations to be of slightly
less magnitude (raw) but in precisely the same relative rank,

being: 0.66 with Classics, o.65 with French, 0.54 with Eng-

glish, and 0.45 with Mathematics. Even in the crude correlations furnished by the whole school without excluding the
non-musicians, exactly the same order is repeated, though with
1 See page 276.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENERAL INTELLIGENCE."

275

the general diminution caused by the impurity: Classics 0.60,
French 0.56, English 0.45, and Mathematics 0.39.
Just the same principle governs even Musical Talent, a faculty that is usually set up on a pedestal entirely apart. For it
is not only correlated with all the other functions, but once

again in precisely the same order: with Classics 0.63, with
French 0.57, with English 0.5I, with Mathematics 0.51, and
with Discrimination 0.40. Ability for music corresponds sub-

stantially with Discrimination of tones, but nevertheless not so
much as it does with algebra, irregular verbs, etc.l
The actual degree of uniformity in this Hierarchy can be

most conveniently and summarily judged from the following ta-

ble of correlation; the values given are those actually observed
(theoretical correction would modify the relative order, but in
no degree affect the amount of Hierarchy or otherwise). Each
number shows the correlation between the faculty vertically
above and that horizontally to the left; except in the oblique

line italicized, the value always becomes smaller as the eye

travels either to the right or downwards.

Classics. French. English. Mathem. Discrim. Music.

Classics, 0.87 0.83 0.78 0.70 o.66 0.63
French, 0.83 o.84 0.67 0.67 0.65 0.57

]3nglish, 0.78 0.67 0.89 0.64 0.54 o.5I

Mathem., 0.70 0.67 0.64 0.88 0.45 0.51
Discrim., o.66 0.65 0.54 0.45 0.40
Music, 0.63 0.57 o.5I 0.51 0.40

Altogether, we have a uniformity that
and far surpasses the conceivable limits
When we consider that the probable err
o.oI for the ordinary studies to about 0.0

surprising that the deviations are no

Hierarchy becomes even more striking

1Of course, notable instances will easily b
ability is apparently divorced from General
school, for example, the best musician is far f
lectually. But not even the most extreme cas
the above rule. A correlation does not state
between two faculties, but only a limited an
dency in this direction; so far from excludin
them and even estimates their exact probab
the normal law of frequency to approximate

stract from further influences, then the prop
given amount of musical talent who will atta
stupidity (or vice versa)
ah

_I I / e
-t2
dt

where h is a measure of the
ligence, and a = the given in

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

276

SPEARMAN:

the oblique line, which is no measure of the central Function
and where consequently the gradation abruptly and entirely

vanishes.1

The above correlations are raw, and therefore do not tell us
either the true rank of the respective activities or the full abso-

lute saturation of each with General Intelligence. For the

former purpose we must eliminate the observational errors, and
for the latter our result must further be squared.2 Thus we
get:
Activity. Correlation with Ratio of the common factor
Gen. Intell. to the specific factor.

Classics, 0.99 99 to i
Common Sense, 0.98 96 4
Pitch Dis., 0.94 89 II
French, 0.92 84 i6
Cleverness,8 o.90 8r 19
English, o.90 8I I9
Mathematics,4 0.86 74 26
Pitch Dis. among the
uncultured,6 0.72 52 48
Music,

0.70

49

51

Light Dis.,5 0.57 32 68
Weight Dis.,6 0.44 19 8I

It is clear how much the amo
relation depends upon the two

there is the above intellective sa

considered faculty is function

ligence; and secondly, there
have estimated the faculty. A

1 The only other data of this ki

some comparisons made between th
Columbia University in the cours
The correlations there obtained, which were throughout somewhat
smaller than the above, manifest only a limited concordance with our
above principle of Hierarchy. But a university is clearly not the place
in which to look for natural correspondence between functions; at that
time of life, strong ties of a wholly artificial sort have intervened; each
student singles out for himself that particular group of studies tend-

ing to his main purpose and devotes to them the most judicious
amounts of relative energy. To determine natural correlations, we
must go to where the pupils meet each other in every department on
relatively equal terms.
2See note to page 273.

Here so termed for brevity; really that quality is meant which
causes a person to be regarded by his teachers as " clever."
4The opposite and more usual view, namely, that mathematics form
an entirely independent faculty, will be found expounded in 331 pages
" Ueber die Anlage zur Mathematik " by the well-known psychiatrist,
Mobius. Similar evidence is brought by him to the effect that this
talent is proportional to the development of the upper outer orbit of
the eye, especially the left.
5 As has been before mentioned, the rank of these three faculties re-

mains ambiguous until their observational errors have been ascertained.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

"GENERAL INTELLIGBNCUE."

277

studies, this accuracy is indicated by the oblique italicized line,
and therefore appears about equal in all cases (not in the least
following the direction of the Hierarchy); but in other cases
there is a large divergence on this head, which leads to important practical consequences. Mathematics, for example, has a
saturation of 74 and Common Sense has one of about 96; but in
actual use the worth of these indications becomes reversed, so
that a subjective impression as to a child's " brightness " is a
less reliable sign than the latter's rank in the arithmetic class;

almost as good as either appears a few minutes' test with a

monochord.

In the above Hierarchy one of the most noticeable features is
the high position of languages; to myself, at any rate, it was
no small surprise to find Classics and even French placed unequivocally above English (note that this term does not refer to
any study of the native tongue, but merely to the aggregate of
all the lessons conducted therein, such as History, Geography,
Dictation, Scripture, and Repetition).
However it may be with these or any other special facts, here

would seem to lie the long wanted general rational basis for
public examinations. Instead of continuing ineffectively to
protest that high marks in Greek syntax are no test as to the
capacity of men to command troops or to administer provinces,
we shall at last actually determine the precise accuracy of the
various means of measuring General Intelligence, and then we
shall in an equally positive objective manner ascertain the exact relative importance of this General Intelligence as compared
with the other characteristics desirable for the particular post
which the candidate is to assume (such as any required Specific
Intelligences, also Instruction, Force of Will, Physical Constitution, Honesty, Zeal, etc.; though some of these factors cannot easily be estimated separately, there is no insuperable
obstacle to weighing their total influence as compared with
General Intelligence). Thus, it is to be hoped, we shall eventually reach our pedagogical conclusions, not by easy subjective
theories, nor by the insignificant range of personal experiences,

nor yet by some catchpenny exceptional cases, but rather by
an adequately representative array of established facts.
6. Outer Factors Determining the Amount of Correlation.

The values given in the preceding section show the correla-

tions found for various specific activities. These amounts,

however, are not wholly constant; the apparent or raw correlations, as we have abundantly seen, deviate in every direction,

depending almost entirely upon the number and kind of impuri-

ties suffered to enter and vitiate them; but even the true cor-

rected correlation appears to admit of no inconsiderable variation,

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

278

SPEARMAN:

according to the conditions of experiment. Generally s
ing, the amount seems to be always greater in proport
the reagents are enabled to manifest their finest powers

such factor readily resolvable into the greater regularity th

obtained. It is especially conspicuous in the followin

nomena:

The correlation is augmented when Discrim
lated according to the reagents' acutest perce
most favorable circumstances, rather than a
freedom from accidental slips.' The correlatio
all the reagents have the function in questio
either by general habit or by careful fore-ex

all are in a comparatively backward stage.2

crease has only manifested itself for the lowe

tice; it might conceivably be reversed, on

higher grades of special training.
The correlation increases, when the conditi
tion are such as least to distract or puzzle the

The other factor appearing at all likely to
amount of correlation is Age. Within the

most of our experiments, however, namely fr
teen years, this influence is not apparent. To
any such change, correlations have been calcu
ondary order, that is, between the above cor
the one hand and Age on the other; even am

children, who are still in the process of developi

acuteness, this correlation of secondary order
-o. I5, thus indicating that the corresponden
crimination and Intellect is almost as great a
children as among the younger ones. For the
paratory school, who have already reached th
powers, this secondary correlation comes to
that the above correspondence is as nearly as
throughout the different ages. Finally we ha
that this correspondence is the cause of the co
tween one kind of Discrimination and another,
has proved of exactly the same value for adul
(0.25 raw).
It must, however, be mentioned that the op
arrived at and stoutly defended by Wissler,
IThis seems to indicate an opposition between the sensory acute-

ness due to Intelligence and that arising from Practice. This, again,
would evidently conflict with Fechner's principle of measuring the
sensory threshold by means of Gauss' formula.

2It must be mentioned that Binet has arrived at the contrary conclusion, namely that correlations with Intelligence are only observable
on first trial and almost disappear when the reagents are again tested.
See L'annde psychologique, Vol. VI.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENERAL INTELLIGENCE."

279

spondence between Intelligence and Mental Tests can only

exist among young children and must disappear with advancing adolescence. He bases his view firstly upon the fact that
his Columbia experiments with University students show no
appreciable correlations of this nature; this argument will be
dealt with in the next section, criticising these same experiments. And secondly, he truly enough remarks that even the
correlations found by Gilbert in children from six years upwards are no longer evident in their seventeenth and eighteenth
years. But Wissler does not seem to have been able to measure these correlations of Gilbert quantitatively, the latter not
having furnished the data required for the standard formula;
they may, however, easily be reckoned by means of the method
of " class averages;" 1 they will then be seen to be all very irregular and throughout in dangerous proximity to the amount
of the probable error; though the seventeenth and eighteenth
years do indeed show little correspondence, yet the sixteenth
year exhibits the very highest of all while the twelfth year has
the lowest; as regards the general tendency of these correlations, it is really if anything to increase with Age (such tendency only amounts to o. 5 ? 0. o8 and therefore is probably a
mere chance).
7. Previous Researches Conflicting with the Present Results.

The great bulk of past experiments do not admit of direct
comparison with the present ones; for while the latter have
been expressly confined to the most elementary forms of laboratory procedure, the former have continually striven to cover
vast territory so as to summarily exhaust the whole problem.
These more ambitious researches, therefore, can only be criticised in the general manner attempted in Chapter II.
But three investigations-luckily such as to represent the
best work accomplished in this department-have also included
our present topic, simple Sensory Discrimination. These three
will now be discussed in more detail.

Gilbert. The first is that of J. Gilbert, whose valuable and
already frequently mentioned experiments upon over I,ooo

school children in I893 included an inquiry into "muscle sense"
and "color differences." The apparatus for the former, as for
my own, consisted in a number of small boxes which looked
and felt exactly similar but were really a set of finely graduated

weights. Also his "color differences" were very analogous to
my sight tests, for both utilized a series of objects each slightly
darker than the preceding one and both were executed by daySee "The Association between Two Things." This Journal, XV,

1904, pp. 72-IOI.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

280

SPEARMAN:

light.' His grading of "mental ability" lay in the usual classi-

fication of the children by their respective masters into "bright,"

"average," and 'dull."

As regards his results, Gilbert is perhaps the most conspicuous among those investigators who do find an appreciable cor-

respondence between "mental tests" and "general ability."

Concerning the above two Sensory Discriminations, he unfor-

tunately confines himself to the following indirect information:

"The curves for reaction-time gave the most positive results
showing that the brighter the child the more quickly he is able

to act. In discrimination the same relation is noticeable but to a

less degree."2 Thus we are referred on to the correlation for
reaction-time, which is everywhere emphasized. "The difference between the reaction-time of those who were bright, of
average mental ability and dull respectively" becomes "very

noticeable." Again, "the bright children react much more

quickly than the dull," and "it is shown here that we judge of
a child's mental ability by the quickness or rapidity with which
they were able to act." Though Gilbert contents himself with
these utterances of rather vague character, he here carefully
furnishes most of the essential data for more precise conclusions;

he tells us the average reaction-time of "bright," "average,"
and "dull" for each of the twelve years tested; also he gives us

all the mean variations.

With this knowledge, we are easily enabled to work out the
exact correlation for ourselves,8 and are surprised to find that
it after all averages no more than o. 19 (? o.o4).4 The corre-

lation of general ability with sensory discrimination, being even

less noticeable, must indeed be minute.
To explain this low figure we must note that from the described mode of procedure the conditions would seem to have
here been at least as unfavorable as they were in the present
Series III. In confirmation of this view, it may be seen that
1 This similarity of apparatus by no means implies any proportional
similarity in mode of proceeding.
2Studies Yale Psych. Lab., II, p. 94. The italics are mine.
8By the method of "class averages."
4 Here we have an illustrative instance of operating with large numbers of cases. This correlation of Gilbert was based upon an examination of no less than some I,ioo children; therewith we may compare
the chief correlation in the present Series IV based on examination of
only 22. To the layman, the latter result would seem the immensely
more exposed of the two to the danger of being a mere chance coincidence. But when the matter is worked out precisely according to the
true and established laws of chance, a correlation like that found by
Gilbert, being less than four times its probable error, would occur by
mere accident about once in 200 times; whereas the correlation in Series
IV, being over twenty times its probable error, would not so occur in
millions upon millions.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

"' GENERAL INTELLIGENCE. "

28I

the average threshold found by Gilbert for discrimination of

weight is as coarse as i/II, whereas even that in Series III

comes to 1/I5 and the more carefully executed Series I shows

I/20. The natural consequence would necessarily have been

to produce a similar attenuation by inadequate representative-

ness and therefore a similarly small correlation as in that series.

Moreover, such an effect would have been materially enhanced
by the heterogeneity of Gilbert's reagents, which must inevitably have introduced serious irrelevant correlation. If these
considerations be justified, his observed correlations must be
taken as being very much smaller than the true ones would

have been.

Seashore. The next results to be criticised are those of Sea-

shore, which include an important investigation into the same
Pitch Discrimination with which our own experiments have

been so much occupied. Seashore, as we have seen, comes to

the resolutely negative conclusion "that there is no functional
relation 1 between any one of these (mental tests) and general
mental ability."
To support this verdict in the case of Pitch, he draws up the
following table, remarking, "the distribution of the results prac-

tically coincides with the most probable distribution according
to chance, which is indicated in the parentheses."
General Mental Ability.
I

II

III

IV

V

I 5(5) 8(6) 3(7) 5(4) (i)

Discriminative II I6 (14) i8 (i6) 8 (I7) 7 (o) 2 (3)
Sensibility III 6 (8) 7 (io) I5 (Io) 5 (6) 3 (2)
for Pitch. IV 6 (7) 7 (8) 8 (9) 8 (5) 2 (I)
V 4 (3) 3 (3) 3 (4) 2 (2) i (I)

But this ingenious mode of calculating co

what disseminated nature, and one may

ing it hardly adapted for giving ver

instead of trying to consider fifty am
time, we sum them up a little and com

find after all a fairly definite tendency fo

be also accompanied by higher place in
desire a still more unified and really usable result, we can
easily obtain it by any of Pearson's or my auxiliary method;2

it works out by Pearson's method to 0.24 (?0.07). Thus

here, where functional relation has been so categorically denied,
it is in reality greater than in Gilbert's reaction-times where it
was held up as being so complete.
The italics are Seashore's.

2 Seashore's data are not sufficient for us to apply the standard

mula.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

282

SPEARMAN:

But this value, though plain and positive enough,

nevertheless be admitted to be somewhat small as com
with that in my own experiments. Nor can this be alto
explained in precisely the same way as in the last e
for here the method of procedure seems to have been
more deliberate; the experimentation was skillfully de
and the seven minutes allowed to each reagent was per
sufficient for its proper execution, though about a qua

an hour appears to me better. But when we conside

composition of the sample of persons experimented u
come upon an irrelevant correlation of great magnitude
find that though Seashore remarks a great discrepancy
the children under and over ten years of age, yet he
them all together into the same correlation and thus in
an irrelevant connection with Age which comes to no l

0.73 (reckoned again by Pearson's auxiliary metho

irrelevancy has evidently just the same effect, wheth
really due to difference of age; or, as I have suggested,
to disparity of culture; or even, as Seashore himself su

to imperfection of experimentation. In all cases ali

real correlation comes to about o.35,1 which is almost
the same result as obtained in my own Series I before a

for further errors.2

Columbia. We now pass to the third and last series o
periments bearing on our particular question. This is th
extensive and in many respects important one that ha
continuously conducted at Columbia University for the

years. For our present purpose, it includes "Percep
Weight" and "Perception of Pitch," while an intel

grading is obtained from the students' average standin
various university courses.

Again the general conclusion is an unqualified ne

reading as follows:
"The markings of the students in college classes cor
with themselves to a considerable degree, but not wit
made in the laboratory."
Here our critical review is rendered much simpler b
correlations having been properly calculated and plainly
Wissler's statement is fully borne out by the values q
1

0.24

/I- 0.732 0.35

2Once more Dr. Seashore has an easy opportunity of practically
testing these theoretically gained conclusions concerning this work;
if he will exclude the disparate cases under ten years of age, and still
more if he will then confine his consideration to such as have learnt

music, he will be able definitely to ascertain whether or not the correspondence does not thereupon become very apparent.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GENERAL INTELLIGENCE."

283

the average correlation of the tests with Intelligence being only
o.o6 and that of the tests among themselves being o.og, thus in
neither case much exceeding the size of the probable error,
though the great majority of instances are at any rate positive.
The amount for Perception of Weight is unfortunately not
given, but that for Perception of Pitch comes to o. i6.
Above we have seen that Wissler would account for this

minuteness of correspondence by the greater age of the students

as compared with the children usually experimented upon

But so far our available evidence is not at all that correspondence diminishes with age, but rather that it is completel

independent thereof. Moreover there does not appear any

urgent need of introducing such a factor, seeing that perhaps
sufficient explanation is forthcoming otherwise. To begin with

university students are not exactly the average from th

schools but more or less a selection of the most able; hence the
intellectively form a more homogeneous class, so that all thei

intellective correlations will be somewhat reduced in amount.

More serious, probably, is the fact that the test of Discrimination has here been so impurified by alien elements, that even
Wissler himself prefers to call it a test of Memory.
But perhaps the chief source of the lowness of the correlations will be found in the following circumstances, namely:
that the subjects were examined three at a time, each being
managed by some "student or officer of the department;" that
no less than twenty-two different tests were carried out, many
of a most difficult character, besides measuring the length and
breadth of each reagent's head; that during the leisure moments
afforded him in the course of these tests the observing "student or officer of the department" had to note in writing the
contour of the reagent's forehead, the character of his hair, the
nature of his complexion, the color of his eyes, the shape of
his nose, the description of his ears, of his lips, of his hands,
of his fingers, of his face, and of his head-and that this whole
procedure is considered to be satisfactorily completed in forty-

five minutes.

On the whole, then, the apparent conflict of previous researches with the present ones does not appear fundamental or
such as in any way to invalidate the evidence now produced.
8. Summary of Conclusions.
To conclude, the following is a brief summary of the principal conclusions indicated by the foregoing experiments:
I. The results hitherto obtained in respect of psychic correlation would, if true, be almost fatal to experimental psychology as a profitable branch of science. But none of these re-sults, as at present standing, can be considered to possess any

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

284

SPEARMAN:

value other than suggestive only; this fact is not so
to individual shortcomings of the investigators, as to the
general non-existence of any adequate system of investigation.
II. On making good this methodological deficiency, there
is found to actually occur a correspondence-continually varying in size according to the experimental conditions-between
all the forms of Sensory Discrimination and the more complicated Intellectual Activities of practical life.
III. By this same new system of methodics, there is also
shown to exist a correspondence between what may provisionally be called "General Discrimination" and "General Intelligence" which works out with great approximation' to one or
absoluteness. Unlike the result quoted in the preceding paragraph, this phenomenon appears independent of the particular

experimental circumstances; it has nothing to do with the

procedure selected for testing either Discrimination or Intelligence, nor with the true representativeness of the values ob-

tained by these tests, nor even with the homogeneousness of the

experimental reagents; if the thesis be correct, its proof should
be reproducible in all times, places, and manners-on the sole
condition of adequate methodics.
IV. The above and other analogous observed facts indicate
that all branches of intellectual activity have in common one funda-

mentalfunction (or group of functions), whereas the remaining

or specific elements of the activity seem in every case to be wholly

dfferentfrom that in all the others. The relative influence of
the general to the specific function varies in the ten departments here investigated from I5:1 to 1:4.
V. As an important practical consequence of this universal
Unity of the Intellectual Function, the various actual forms of
mental activity constitute a stably interconnected Hierarchy
according to their different degrees of intellective saturation.

Hence, the value of any method of examination as to intellectual

fitness for any given post is capable of being precisely ascertained, since it depends upon:
(a) the accuracy with which it can be conducted;
(b) the hierarchical intellective rank of the test;
(c) the hierarchical intellective rank of the duties involved
in the post.

Methods have been given whereby all these three points can be

sufficiently ascertained.

VI. Discussion as to the psychical nature of this funda-

mental Function has been reserved until a more complete
acquaintance has been gained concerning its objective relations.
Among the latter, the principal and determining one is its
1 In the present experiments, as far as the second decimal place.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

"GENERAL INTELLIGE NCB." 285

unique position as indicated in paragraph IV. The c

further evidence is to the following effect:

The function appears to become fully developed in ch
by about their ninth year, and possibly even much e
From this moment, there normally occurs no further

even into extreme old age.

In adult life, there would seem no appreciable diffe

between the two sexes.

The Function almost entirely controls the relative position
of children at school (after making due allowance for difference
of age), and is nine parts out of ten responsible for success in
such a simple act as Discrimination of Pitch.
Its relation to the intellectual activity does not appear to be
of any loosely connected or auxiliary character (such as willingness to make an effort, readiness in adaptation to unfamiliar
tests, or dexterity in the fashion of executing them), but rather
to be intimately bound up in the very essence of the process.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

286

SPEARMAN:

APPENDIX.
EXPERIMENTAI, SERIES I.

Village School, 24 Oldest Children.
A. Original Data.
Sex.

Age.
CO

n

0

Discriminative
Discriminative
Threshold.

Pitch Light Weight Common Sense Cleverness
out of School. in School.

I/3

I:200

1:200

(A) (B)

v. d.

f

11 6

8

m

12 II

f
f

I5

13 8

12 8
II 4
II II

I4
I3

4
3
6

4
14
7

4
4
4
9
7
4
8

II 3

5
25
IO
IO

12

IO

m

12 5

I8

II

m

12 7
12 8

14
6o

30
3

9
7

IO

13 io
13 I

20

12

IO

5

12

m

f
f
f

f
f
f
f
f

I3 I

12 I

IO 6

40
45

II 5

m

IO 0

33
25

f

II 9
13 7
12 6

90
I7
24
i8

m

m

m
m

m

f
m

10 4
II 7

Intellectual
Rank.

II

2

70
17
28

II

2

90

I9

12

9

5
4
15
I5
26

15

35

IO

42
25

20

6

5

II

7

2
22

i6 IO 7
I

I

I

3

2

3

Io

14

9

8 19 12
2

4

5

6

21

22

12

9

6

II

I9

4

13 I2 I8
4 8 8

9 I9 14

I5

8

Io

28

17 II 17

5

22 21 5
14 20 15
19 17 24

20

13
14
14

I6
I7

I8

i8

23

3

24

6

20

24 23 23
7

20

15

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

i6

13
21

287

" GENERAL INTELLIGENCE."2

EXPERIMENTAL SERIES I.

Village School, 24 Oldest Children.
B. Calculated Correlations.

Description. Amounts.
First Term versus Second Term. Raw. Prob. Err. Corrected.

Sound Discrim.
it

cc

Common Sense (A)
it " (B)

School Cleverness

Light "
.(

C.

Common Sense (A)
t "i (B)

School Cleverness

Weight
ic

({

Common Sense (A)

.. " (B)

School Cleverness

+0.44
+0.41
+0.25

+0.42
+0.44

0o.o07

0.07
o.og
0.07

+0.47

+0.38
+0.27

0.07

o .o8

+0.37

0.07
+0.64
Common Sense (B)
0.05
Com.
Sense
School
Clever.
Av.
Common Sense
0.04
+0.55
Discrimination
Discrimination "
0.05
+0.25

Intelligence "

Amal. Intell.

it

Sex

Intelligence "

Sex

Sound Discrim.

Age

Light Discrim.
Weight Discrim.
Intelligence Av.

cc

General Intell.
cc

Is
.

Corr. Discrim.-Intell.
Pitch Discrim.

+0.38

+0.66
+0.2I*

0.o02
o.og

0.07

0.04

o.og
+0.47* 0.07
+0.4I
+0.30
0.07

+0.20

+0.34

+o.15

o.og

0.09

0.05

o.09

Light "

Weight "

Common Sense

School Cleverness
General Discrim.

1+0.71

0

+o.s8
+0.43 0
'a

(A)
+0.86 '

+0 39 o
+o.86 ,

+0.00 ?

+0.59

o

+o.i8

J Q"
+0.38

+0.00 ,

+0.72 2
+0-57 P
+0.44 ,

+0.98 8
+0.90
+I.00

(p. e. about
0.02)

*These two correlations have had to be calculated by an auxiliary method, the
standard formula not being applicable; hence, the probable error is considerably
larger than it would otherwise have been.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

288

SPEARMAN:

EXPBRIMENTALI SERIBS II.

Same Village School, 36 next Oldest Children.
A. Original Data.
Sex.

Pitch.

Age.

Intellectual Class

estimated by

Schoolmaster.
m

m

f
m

f
m
m
m
m

f
f
f
f
*f

9
8
7
8
8
8

9
8

9
7
8

7
7
3

6
6
i6

2

o

2

o

24
26

2

4
9

35
35

3

42

3

2
0

II
2

7

2

9

II

5
5

8

*m

7

m

Io

2

*m

7
7
6

0

f
*f
m
m
m

*m

*f
m

*m
*m
*m
*m

f
*f
*m
m

*m

*m

9
7
8
6
6

I

9
6
Io
2

38

48
48

7
5

II

112

6

120

5

II

120

6

120

5

> 20
> I20
> I20

o

7

3
6
6

5
6

2
2

3

96
96

I04

5

I

8o

70
74
74
77
77
80

112

6
6

2

3

7

7

I

67
67

Io

6
6

2

I

I

2

2

I

> I20

> I20
> I20
> I20

I

Those marked with a star are in the infant school; their relative intellectual
rank has not been ascertained, and therefore they are not included in the correla-

tions below. Their average threshold is about 40 v. d., or more than double that of
the remainder.

B. Calculated Correlations.

Description. Amounts.
First Term versus Second Term. Raw. Prob.Zrr. Corrected.

Pitch Discrim. Intellectual Class -0.25 o.I8 +0.4I
Age Pitch Discrim. +0.55 o.i8 +0.69
I" Intellectual Class --0.65 o. I8 -o.8

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

"IGENERAL INTALIJJGENCZ." 2

289

EXPERIMENTAI, SURIES III.

High Class Preparatory School for Boys.
A. Original Data.
Age.

Discriminative Place in School (before modiThreshold. fication to eliminate Age).
Pitch
From

FKx.Ser.

I,ight Weight

classics French English M athem.

1:200 1:200

IV.

Io 9
12 4
II

I

50
3

i6

'9

Io

5

9

'3

6
I'

II

9
5

22

23

22

22

I

I

2

I0

4
6

Io

6

7
5
13

Io

Io

10 II

> 60

I0

'3 7

4

12

2

Io

Io

4

2

2

II

12

14

i8

23
8

22

'3

I5

'5

3
7

5
7
15
13
3

i8

12

12 6
IO 4
9 5

4

I0

20

Io

II

12 0

II

Io

12

IO 2

II

12

II

II

24
5
3
5
6

14

Io

2

10 I

9 8
II Io
II

I

Io 6
io 8

i8
i8
13

'3

IO 4
10 4

11

14
'9
14

14

'5

'3

10 I

12 3

10 7
'3 7

'5

7

7
4

> 6o

13

'9

7
9
13

I

20
Io
2

8

23

4

7

I

23

4
6

12

14

I2

3

3
9

'3

II

12

II

'7

i8

17

Io

21

20

21

'3

'9
i8

21

i6

9
8

21

'5

Io

20

I0

9

9

i6

II

19

20

5

8

i8
28

'3

i6

27

'9

27

'4

6

'7

4

'3
'9
17

B. Calculated Correlations.

Description. Amounts.
First Term. versus Second Term. Raw. Prob. Error.

Amal. School Place* Light Discrimination +O.13 o.o9

9 4 it it Weight " +0.12 0.og

ti It Id Amal. Light and Weight +o.9g o.o6
Weight Discrim. Light Discrim. +0.32 o.o8

Pitch " Weight " +o.16 o.og

,, I, iLight " +0.I3 0.og
Age Weight " +o.o9 o.og

id cc ~Light " +0.14 0.0og
*Modified to eliminate age.

JOURNAI,-I2

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

290

SPEARMAN:

EXPERIMENTAL SERIIS IV.

High Class Preparatory School for Boys.
A. Original Data.
Age Pitch Place in School (before modification to Music
eliminate Age).
vi, N Classics French English Mathem.
-.

.

.z
a'

r.

a~' 41
-

0

^

0

0

a'

N ix ZNYs 's g ' ^O N
0

i

a

?j

l

12 6 2 8 7 4 5 3 3 4 3 3 4 2 3 8
12 4 3 II I2 I 133o 3 I I 3 3 I3 3 9
9 8 3 i9 i8 15 21 19 I6 23 21 i8 21 19 17 6
I3 7 4 2 2 I 2 2 I 2 2 I 7 7 7 3
10 4 4 21 I9 22 23 22 20 21 24 i6

Io 7 4 23 23 22 26 23 22 28 25 23 29 25 23 I
13
6
5
3
3
3
3
21
11 Io 5 6 4 3 7 6 5 6 6 2 9 8 6
10 I 5 29 26 24 23 25 2 27 26 22 25 23 19 7
II i 6 20 20 i8 2021 i8 2 20 19 17 i6 15 14
13

4

7

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

5

io 6 7 26 24 21 27 i6 13 26 I9 17 22 i8 i6 II

12 3 7 I8 17 i6 I7 20 19 25 23 21 19 17 14 20
13 I 8 5 5 5 4 4 2 5 8 5 5 4 I 4
II I IO 22 I9 17 19 i8 17 20 17 15 23 21 2I i8
9 9 Io 33 29 27 33 29 27 33 27 27 32 29 27 17

10 4 II 28 25 23 30 27 24 i8 i8 13 30 27 22
I3 0o 1 4 3 2 6 5 4 7 4 4 2 3 4
Io 2 II 7 6 6 12 7 6 8 5 8 II 9 8
13 0 II 12 II II II II I2 15 I6 i6 6 5 2 12
12 0 II 17 I6 i6 15 24 22 24 24 15
12 II 12 9 8 7 8 8 7 9 7 7 I4 I2 I2
13 I 14 io 9 8 io 9 8 II io 9 Io io 9 13

Io 4 14 27 21 14 24 22 15 17 II Io 26 20 i8 2

o1 I 15 24 22 20 I8 17 14 29 24 24 I8 15 13
12 6 15 14 13 I2 15 14 II IO 9 6 8 6 5 o1
Io 8 15 30 27 29 26 30 29 28 26
12 8 i8 i6 15 13 25 24 20 14 14 12 20 21 20 19
9 5 20 32 25 31 25 32 26 33 26
II 2 24 15 14 9 14 I2 9 i6 15 14 13 II o0
0o 9 50 25 28 I9 15
Io II > 60 31 28 26 32 28 26 31 28 25 31 28 25 22
13 7> 60 13 0o 9 I0 12 12 i6 14

_

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

" GINZRAIN INULLIGUNCU."

291

EXPInRIM1tNTAL SURIMS IV.

High Class Preparatory Schoolfor Boys.
B. Calculated Correlations.
Amounts.

Description.

First Term versus Second Term Raw Prb. 1Urr.
Corrected
Pitch Discrimination

+0.33 0.04 +0.45
Av. School Place (unmodified)
+o .6o
Classics (modified to eliminate
age)
0.021

kLV.

it

French

cc

cc

it

cc

it

"

English

"

"

it

c

+0.56

C'

Mathematics" cc cc

+0.45
+0.39

0.03
0.03

0.03

Classics (musicians+o.66
only)'
+0.89 French "t ft
+o .88
+o.65i
English it
+0.54
+0.73

it

0.03

0.031

0.03

Mathematics cc
Classics
French

0.0~
0.01

Ic

4)

cc

Rnglish

Mathlematics
Amlal. School Place
Classics
cc

Frenchl
CC

French

9c

English

ic

Mathematics
Amal. School Place
French

English

i9
I c
I I

cc

Mathematics

c I

English

c i

Mathematics
Mathematics

ICnglish
Age

i c
I c

Amal. School Place (unmodified)
44 44 I (modified)
96

ti

Pitch Discrim.
Corr. Discrim.-Intell.
Amal. sSchool
Classic

+0.45

+o.68
Amal. School Placc (musicians
only)
+o .87
0
Classics
+0.87 O.01
cc

CC

Place

It

Classics
French

English

ic

Mathematics
Pitch Discrimination

cc

.kV tc
cc

+o .84

0.01

0

0.01

+o.9

+0.89

+o.88

+0.95

O.01

+o .83
+0.78 0.01
0.01

+0.70

0.01

+o.67 0.01 +0.78 0
+o.67
+0.78 C
+o .64 0.01 +0.74 0
0.02
+0.76
+0.78 ?d
0.01

+0-05 0.05

0.07

0.01

--0.07

0.01

+0.57

0.03

+0.51
+0.51

0.03
0.03

English

Mathematics

General Auditory Faculty

+0.69 0

+0.69 P`

+0.63

0.92
0.90
o.86

Music

Music and Pitch Discrim.

+0.77 ,I

0.94

French

Genreral Intelligenzce

+o .85 ??sc

+099 &4

Pitch Discrimination

it

0

+0.00 I.

o.o6

+0.63 0.03

+0.40

Classics
reneral Intelligence

008

+0.91 ,~

kv. +0.72 0.02

0.70
1.00

(p. e. about
002 )

'All School Places below this point refer to the musicians considered alone.

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

SPEARMAN.

292

EXPERIMENTAI, SERIES V.
Adults.

A. Original Data.

Reagent Sex. Age.

Pitch Iight Weight
1/3

f
f

3 4 8
7 7 6

m
m1

n2
s8

27

V4

m

23
39
55

m

m

53

m

v

m

n

69
24
45

n

f
f
f
f
f

s

m

m

f
f
f

30
30
52

m

45
40
30

m
n
m

m
v

v

n

f
f
f

n

v

m

v. d. 1:200 1:200

2

3

7 5
6 5

5
10

7

15

6
8

10
8 2

8

Io

22

o0 3 16

78

22

m

50

s

m

21

v

f

s

m

v

m

n

f

v

m

35
40
25
40
40

v

m

40

Psychologist, experimental
Plays violin
Maker of musical handbells

8

21

22

Remarks.

8

6

I0

12

4

15
27

4
5

I2
Io

5 8 30
7 24 8

Has unusually pronounced
calcareous degeneration

of the arteries

65 7 8
15 6 I5

I2 48 6
I5 8 i6

30 15 Io
Io 20 14

00o 6 14
o00 8 12

30 I5 i8
30 20 28

Has bad epilepsy
Extraordinarily slow thinker
The village organist

80 12 19
I80 II 9

1 m indicates (in this column) that the reagent has been specially selected on
account of remarkable musical talent; 5 are amateurs and 2 are professionals.

2n indicates normal and the reagents may be regarded as fairly typical of the

class termed "well educated;" they contain about their average proportion of
musical ability.

3S indicates specially selected for some characteristic mentioned in the column

of remarks.

4 v indicates well-to-do villagers.

B. Calculated Correlations.

Description. Amounts.
First Term versus Second Term Raw. Prob.Brr. Corrected.

Pitch Discrim. Light Discrim. +0.32 o.o8
t" "( Weight " " 0.3I o.o8 +.3

Light " < " 0.1 o.o8 J -

Age " Pitch " "007 o.o8

if it Light ", "0.15 o.o8 } o.oo
" " ?"-o . I-0.14 o.o8 J

This content downloaded from
169.236.236.7 on Wed, 24 Feb 2021 19:48:32 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

