March 13, 2024
Doi: 10.56296/aip00008
ISSN: 2976-937X

METHODS

Introducing semantic loadings in factor
analysis: Bridging network psychometrics
and cognitive networks for understanding
depression, anxiety and stress
Filippo Stanghellini1, Enrico Perinelli2, Luigi Lombardi1, & Massimo Stella1*
Received: September 25, 2023 | Accepted: February 22, 2023 | Published: March 13, 2024 | Edited by: Hudson Golino
1

CogNosco Lab, Department of Psychology and Cognitive Science, University of Trento, Italy

2

Department of Psychology and Cognitive Science, University of Trento, Italy

∗Please address correspondence to Massimo Stella, massimo.stella@inbox.com, CogNosco Lab, Department of Psychology

and Cognitive Science, University of Trento, Corso Bettini 31, Rovereto, Italy. This article is published under the Creative
Commons BY 4.0 license. Users are allowed to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format, so long as attribution is given to the creator.

A psychometric scale reports experiences in terms of items/sentences rated by individuals. In
this study, we investigate whether psychometric item ratings reflect semantic/syntactic associations between concepts in items. To this aim, we introduce semantic loadings as a semantic counterpart of psychometric factors, i.e. clusters of items obtained by correlations between item ratings. Semantic loadings quantify how clusters of semantically related concepts, as expressed in the texts of items, are allocated across psychometric factors as identified by ratings. As a case study, we focus on 39775 individual responses to the Depression
Anxiety and Stress Scale (DASS) with 42 items on a 4-point Likert scale. To identify communities of semantically related concepts, we exploit the cognitive network framework of Textual
Forma Mentis Networks (TFMNs), which reconstruct semantic/syntactic links encoded in the
texts of items (e.g. "feel" and "sad" in the item "I usually feel sad"). To identify factors we compare eigenvector-based exploratory analysis with Graph Exploratory Analysis (EGA), which
can both cluster items (and their texts) according to user ratings. We find that EGA is better
at reconstructing the psychometric structure of DASS along the dimensions of anxiety, stress
and depression. Following dual coding theory and the Deep Lexical Hypothesis, we posit that
the act of reading items activates interconnected concepts and this influences user ratings
and their expressed psychological constructs. Our results show a quantitative match: TFMNbased semantic loadings can identify specific aspects of emotional dysregulation, emotional
exhaustion, physical distress and tension states of EGA-based psychometric factors, in nonrandom ways. We discuss our results in view of relevant mental distress literature, psychometric scale designing and links with episodic and semantic memories.
Keywords: network psychometrics, cognitive network science, network clustering, semantic
framing, text analysis, psychometric measurements

advances.in/psychology

1

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

1. INTRODUCTION
The methodological framework of network

psychometrics has been gaining increasing
traction in recent years as it offers a nuanced
view of psychological phenomena (Christensen & Golino, 2021; Christensen et al., 2018;
Epskamp et al., 2018; Golino & Epskamp, 2017).
Predicated upon the principle of conceptualising psychological constructs as a network of interacting components (Christensen et al., 2020;
Costantini et al., 2019; Epskamp & Fried, 2018),
rather than latent variables (Lovibond & Lovibond, 1995), it offers a unique perspective that
challenges conventional understanding. This
perspective allows researchers to model complex psychological constructs, such as anxiety,
stress, and depression (Lovibond & Lovibond,
1995; Van den Bergh et al., 2021), not merely as
individual, distinct entities, but as interconnected symptom networks wherein each
symptom can potentially influence and be influenced by others (Costantini et al., 2019; Golino et al., 2020; Van den Bergh et al., 2021). Such
an approach, while respecting the multidimensionality of these constructs, provides a more
detailed representation of their intricate structure (Borsboom et al., 2021). Exploratory Graph
Analysis (EGA) provides results that are informative about the presence and number of
psychological factors at work in determining
correlations in psychometric data (Christensen
et al., 2020; Epskamp et al., 2018; Golino &
Epskamp, 2017). In this way, EGA can be an alternative solution to standard factor analysis.
Another methodological framework that has
been gaining traction in psychology is the field
of cognitive network science (Siew et al., 2019;
Stella, 2022). Cognitive networks encode relationships between concepts and thus give
structure to human knowledge in terms of associative links between concepts, ideas and
words (Baker et al., 2023; Castro & Siew, 2020).
Notice that cognitive psychology usually assumes words are expressions of concepts
(which can be more specific instances of general ideas; Aitchison, 2012; Siew et al., 2019).
advances.in/psychology

Stanghellini et al., 2024

In cognitive networks, nodes work at the representation

of

individual

ideas,

expressed

through words, so that concepts and words can
thus be used interchangeably, like we do in the
following (Siew et al., 2019). Unveiling the networked structure between concepts plays a
critical role in enhancing our understanding of
the interactions between different cognitive
components associated with these constructs,
in particular in human representations of
knowledge (Baker et al., 2023; Hills & Kenett,
2022) and their interplay with personality traits
(Samuel et al., 2023). Drawing upon graph theory and complex systems science (Newman,
2012), cognitive network science provides a
means to visualise and quantify the complex
web of relationships among various concepts.
Here we focus on a particular type of cognitive
networks that has been recently developed by
Stella (2020): Textual Forma Mentis Networks
(TFMNs). These specific networks represent the
structure of knowledge embedded in text via
either syntactic specifications, e.g. "love" is
specified as being a "weakness" in the sentence
"love is weakness", or through overlap in meaning, e.g. "weakness" and "issue" can be synonyms in the sentence "love is a weakness and
an issue". Importantly, TFMNs can map these
relationships without resorting to word co-occurrences, i.e. words co-occurring within a
given number of words in a sentence or text. To
overcome this limit, TFMNs adopt a unique
combination of AI and psychological data: The
AI identifies syntactic relationships in text and
matches syntactically related or synonymous
words, whereas psychological data (S. M. Mohammad & Turney, 2013) is used to identify
which words elicit a positive/negative/neutral
valence or a given emotion. In this way, TFMNs
can reconstruct how a given set of texts or communicative intentions framed one or more concepts and which specific emotion-conveying
words were used to describe key ideas, cf. Stella
(2022).
Textual forma mentis networks can be relevant
for psychometric questionnaires, where a

2

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

Stanghellini et al., 2024

respondent has to read an item and then rate

entwined, as mentioned above (see also Mace

it according to one’s own personal experience

& Unlu, 2020). Whereas semantic memories are

(Rattray & Jones, 2007). In accordance with

coded in TFMNs, the autobiographical compo-

dual coding theory (Paivio, 1991), we consider

nent that modulates the way a specific individ-

the content of a given item as a cue stimulating

ual predisposes their self-report response is im-

both an emotional and cognitive reaction in

plicitly captured by the observed Likert-type

the respondent, whose semantic memory

values without an explicit direct semantic rep-

deals with understanding the content of the

resentation. Following the Deep Lexical Hy-

item itself (Aitchison, 2012; Ciaglia et al., 2023)

pothesis (Cutler & Condon, 2023) we can exploit

and whose autobiographical memory can get

the relationship between item ratings and as-

activated for producing a rating of the same

sociated semantic memories to construct a se-

item (Meléndez et al., 2018; Rubin, 2005).

mantic characterisation of psychometric fac-

Several recent studies have shown how the semantic and autobiographical memories are

tors, representing specific psychological constructs.

not independent but rather interact in com-

Importantly, a core assumption about the ap-

plex ways (Irish & Piguet, 2013; Mace & Unlu,

plication of TFMNs for psychometric question-

2020), e.g. emotions and events in the autobio-

naires entails that the semantic and emotional

graphical memory can influence or alter search

representations behind the items are under-

and retrieval from semantic memory. This in-

stood to be homogeneous across (a population

terplay means that there is a relationship be-

of) individuals (see also Stella, 2020), whose cog-

tween how a respondent rates a given series of

nitive memories are partly mimicked by the

items and the items’ semantic/syntactic con-

network component of the TFMN structure ex-

tent. In our approach with semantic loadings,

tracted from the questionnaire through AI syn-

some of the semantic memories necessary for

tactic parsing and semantic enrichment (see

understanding the content of the question-

the Methods for more details). However, psy-

naire’s items are explicitly modelled using the

chometric scales are usually composed by

forma mentis network representation (Stella,

items that should be fully understandable and

2022).

accessible by the largest portion of a target

According to the recently postulated Deep Lex-

ical Hypothesis, which builds on past approaches for building psychometric personality scales based on language use in communicative intentions (Wood, 2015), the presence of
psychological constructs percolates through
language use (Cutler & Condon, 2023). This percolation makes it possible to observe changes

population. This property of the psychometric
scales is usually called "face validity" (Anastasi,
1988; Markus & Borsboom, 2013). Consequently,
the above assumption appears to be naturally
justified by the way psychometricians normally
construct psychometric scales (Cutler & Condon, 2023; Lovibond & Lovibond, 1995; Wood,
2015).

in both expressed and understood semantic

Very importantly, the relationship between self-

memories, based on the presence or absence

reported respondent rates and their seman-

of specific psychological constructs. Here we

tic/syntactic content can be exploited by intro-

do not have access to alterations on the acti-

ducing the concept of semantic loadings. This

vated memories after an individual reads a

novel concept characterises psychometric fac-

given item. However, we can posit that the

tors through the lens of textual forma mentis

presence of a given psychological construct,

networks. To this aim, we represent a whole

e.g. anxiety, interacts with both semantic and

questionnaire as a textual forma mentis net-

autobiographical memory levels, which are

work,

advances.in/psychology

unveiling

the

3

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

syntactic/semantic/emotional

patterns

em-

bedded in the texts of all items. On this structure, we extract semantic communities, i.e.
clusters of words more tightly connected with
each other than with other concepts (Newman,
2012) and which, in the context of a TFMN, all
share a given semantic set of features and thus
belong

to

the

same

semantic

context

(Aitchison, 2012). Differently put, these semantic communities represent key interconnected
topics of ideas being syntactically or semantically related across the whole text of a psychometric questionnaire. We then devote our attention to psychometric factors. When obtained either through either factor analysis or
network psychometrics, psychometric factors
are clusters of individual items (Christensen et
al., 2018; Golino & Epskamp, 2017), grouped together to explain unique aspects of the variance present in the multivariate data of responses to the whole questionnaire (Gorsuch,
2013). Historically, emphasis has been given to
the numerical aspects of identifying variance
patterns (Costantini et al., 2019; Gorsuch, 2013),
thus focusing on the numerical responses
given to items themselves within psychometric factors. Only recently some attention was
devoted to identifying the semantic information in items via artificial neural networks

Stanghellini et al., 2024

involved in the psychometric questionnaire.
Similarly to how factor loadings indicate the relevance of a given item to the identified factor
(Gorsuch, 2013), semantic loadings can indicate
how prominently its ideas were mentioned in a
given psychometric factor and thus characterised it. Surely psychometricians designing a
given psychometric scale do encode different
psychological constructs across items when
wording items themselves or structuring them
along subscales. However, psychometricians do
not know a priori how these ideas will spread
across psychometric factors since the latter are
due to individuals’ responses. Semantic loadings unveil this relationship between numerical/categorical responses and clusters of ideas
in items.
Adopting the Depression, Anxiety and Stress

Scales (DASS) by Lovibond and Lovibond (1995),
we show the presence of several semantic
communities within and among scales, relative
to different facets of neuroticism and to physical symptoms. We further show how these
communities are not spread uniformly across
the identified factors but rather concentrate or
load only on specific factors, in line with relevant psychological findings.

(Rosenbusch et al., 2020), although only to con-

These factors can greatly automate the inter-

sider and reduce semantic overlap between

pretation of psychometric factors themselves

items, i.e. items coding similar experiences.

by attributing them to more semantic content,

Here, we rather focus on the semantic nature

which can better inform users (e.g., experi-

of the interconnected wording of a given item,

menters and practitioners adopting) of a spe-

considering all the words adopted across items

cific psychometric questionnaire. In case large

in a given psychometric factor as a semantic

language models get better and better at iden-

factor: We define semantic loadings as the

tifying commonalities in semantic communi-

overlaps between semantic factors (from factor

ties, we consider this process as becoming

analysis or EGA) and semantic communities

completely automated and powerfully high-

(from the TFMN of the questionnaire). Seman-

lighting more detailed and multidimensional

tic loadings can thus pinpoint how semantic

semantic descriptions of relevant factors.

contexts or topics, as encoded by experiment
designers in the questionnaire, distribute

We introduce our specific methodology in the

across semantic factors, i.e. collections of words

Methods Section, which is followed by a Results

coming from items clustered together not be-

Section focused on the DASS case study. We

cause of semantic patterns but rather because

conclude this manuscript with a detailed Dis-

of numerical ratings provided by participants

cussion of our results and a reflection on the

advances.in/psychology

4

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

Stanghellini et al., 2024

pros and cons of our novel methodological

communities for defining and computing se-

pipeline.

mantic loadings in the following subsections.

METHODS

A correlation analysis with Spearman ρ correla-

2.1 Data Processing

tions is reported in Figure 1. When considering

2.

As a case study to showcase the potential of
our methodology, we here used the Depres-

sion, Anxiety, and Stress Scales (DASS; Lovibond & Lovibond, 1995). This questionnaire is a
set of 3 self-report scales, designed to quantify
depression, anxiety and stress. Each of these
DASS scales contains 14 items, allocated into
subscales of 2-5 items with similar content. For
the original structure of DASS please refer to
Lovibond and Lovibond (1995). The responses
to the DASS questionnaire are given on a 4point Likert scale, ranging from 0 (did not apply

to me at all) to 3 (applied to me very much, or
most of the time). Every participant has to read
a given item and rate it according to how frequently the experience described in the item
applies to the participant’s life experience. The

items as sequences of numerical/categorical
responses, e.g. Q1 = {1, 2, 4, 4, ..., 2}, they correlate
positively with each other. The correlogram also
provides a visual impression that items in subscales tend to correlate more positively with
other items in the same subscale. This phenomenon is stronger for items in the Depression
subscale and more nuanced for items in the
Anxiety and Stress subscales. We expect these
patterns to be reflected in Exploratory Factor
Analysis (EFA) and in EGA, which are outlined in
the following subsection. All p-values reported
in this article are two-tailed.
2.2 Extracting psychometric factors with EFA
or EGAnet
2.2.1 Exploratory Factor Analysis of the DASS
subscales

scores for depression, anxiety and stress are

Exploratory Factor Analysis (EFA) is a statistical

calculated by summing the scores for the rele-

technique used to determine the latent struc-

vant items. Higher scores indicate a higher de-

ture of a set of observed variables (Costello &

gree of emotional distress.

Osborne, 2005). It functions by decomposing

Here we used pre-collected data for DASS as
stored on openpsychometrics.org and as available on Kaggle (Last Accessed: 17/07/23). This
dataset consists of 39775 survey responses
from individuals who completed the DASS
questionnaire.
No missing data were found in the dataset,
thus no data imputation was required. Since
we focused on exploratory analyses, we aggregated all available data together, without stratifying it for different demographics (Veltri,
2023). Notice that the methodology implemented in this paper is general enough to be
applied to different socio-demographic strata
of this or other scale datasets, e.g. reconstructing psychometric factors for different demographic subgroups. Hence, we here proceed
with the aggregated data and outline how we
extract psychometric factors and semantic

advances.in/psychology

the correlation matrix of the observed variables
into specific and common variance. The common variance, referred to as psychometric factors, demonstrates shared variance among variables, while specific variance is the residual variance unique to each variable (Fabrigar et al.,
1999). The objective of EFA is to simplify the
structure of the data by reducing the dimensionality and identifying clusters of interrelated
variables, thus providing a theoretical frame
work for further analysis (Thompson, 2004).
In executing EFA, several steps are crucial. The
process starts with factor extraction, using estimation methods like Maximum Likelihood or
Principal Axis Factoring. These methods aim to
extract the smallest number of factors that account for the common variance in the data
(Costello & Osborne, 2005). Factor rotation follows, aiming to provide a simpler and more interpretable factor structure (Thompson, 2004).

5

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

Stanghellini et al., 2024

Figure 1
Correlogram Based on Spearman ρ Correlations for the 42 Items in the DASS Scale. Notice that
consecutive items are clustered according to the subscales found by (Lovibond & Lovibond,
1995): Depression (Q3, ..., Q42), Anxiety (Q2, ..., Q41), and Stress (Q1, ..., Q39).

This stage requires a decision between oblique

be accounted for when loading them across

and

on

factors. Factor loadings and EFA statistics are

whether the factors are assumed to be corre-

reported in Tables A1 and A2, respectively. The

lated or not, respectively. Finally, factor inter-

3-factor model reported in these tables was rel-

pretation is conducted by analysing the factor

ative to an AIC of 3942530, a BIC of 3943948, a

loading matrix, where higher loadings indicate

Comparative Fit Index (CFI) of 0.927 (values ≥

a stronger relationship between a variable and

0.9 indicate a good fit; Costello & Osborne, 2005)

a factor (Costello & Osborne, 2005) and thus

and a Root Mean Square Error of Approxima-

motivate the allocation of that variable to that

tion (RMSEA) of 0.052 (values ≤ 0.06 indicate a

cluster of variables, i.e. to that psychometric

good fit; Kline, 2016). The cumulative variances

factor. Here, we performed EFA using the

explained by factors were 0.211 (factor 1), 0.394

lavaan package in R (version 0.6-15, documen-

(factors 1 and 2), and 0.525 (factors 1, 2, and 3).

tation available here, Last Accessed: 17/07/23)

The sums of the squared oblique loadings (ei-

by Rosseel (2012).

genvalues) were 8.87 (factor 1), 7.69 (factor 2),

orthogonal

rotations,

depending

Given the presence of positive correlations
across items of different subscales, we resorted
to an oblimin rotation with ∆ = 0.0001, which allows for correlations across different factors to

advances.in/psychology

and 5.50 (factor 3). Considering only loadings
significant at a .01 level, the EFA identified the
following non-overlapping allocation of items
across factors, identified by allocating one item
to the factor with the highest loading (where S

6

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

Stanghellini et al., 2024

indicates the stress subscale, D the depression

We investigated whether a 4-factor model

subscale and A the anxiety subscale in the orig-

could improve things. The 4-factor EFA did in-

inal DASS):

deed reduce AIC and BIC (3917.8 and 3919.6, re-

• Factor 1: {S = {1, 6, 8, 11, 14, 18, 22, 27, 29, 32, 35,
39}, A = {9, 30, 40}, D = ∅};

spectively) while increasing the CFI to 0.949,
however, it also produced a squared total factor
loading of 0.631 for factor 4 and an increase in

• Factor 2: {S = {12, 33}, A = {2, 4, 7, 15, 19, 20, 23,
25, 28, 36, 41}, D = ∅};

the cumulative variance of only 0.015 compared
to the 3-factor model. For these reasons, we
considered the 4-factor model as being only

• Factor 3: {S = ∅, A = ∅, D = {3, 5, 10, 13, 16, 17, 21,
24, 26, 31, 34, 37, 38, 42}}.

marginally better than the 3-factor model,
while providing a less clear partitioning of items
across factors, and thus discarded it from the

The above notation can be read in the following way: Factor 1 was allocated with items {1, 6,

..., 39} from the Stress subscale of DASS, together with items {9, 30, 40} from the Anxiety
subscale and no item from the Depression subscale, etc. The Cronbach’s alphas for the above
clusters were .956, .923, and .921, respectively, all
above the .80 threshold defining good-quality
partitioning (Costello & Osborne, 2005).

rest of the analysis.
We thus focus on the 3-factor model from EFA,
which however suffers from two limitations: (i)
this model cannot fully reconstruct the original
subscale system, (ii) more crucially, in the
model it is not trivial to identify why items 9, 30,
and 40 - situations of fear and anxiety - should
be merged with items from the Stress subscale.
For these reasons, we proceed with the identi-

We can assess the quality of this partitioning in

fication of psychometric factors through an al-

terms of the ground truth based on the sub-

ternative technique: Exploratory Graph Analy-

scales of the original DASS scale. In quantita-

sis.

tive terms, we can use purity as an evaluation

2.2.2 Exploratory Graph Analysis

metric that compares the results of a given
clustering (i.e. allocation of items across factors) with a given ground truth. Let X = {x1, x2, ...,

xN } be a set of N elements that have been clustered into k clusters C = {C1, C2, ..., Ck}. Also, let G
= {G1, G2, ..., Gl} be the known (ground truth) assignments of X into l classes. Purity P is given
by:

Exploratory Graph Analysis (EGA) is a novel
technique proposed by Golino and Epskamp
(2017) that provides a data-driven method to
determine the number of factors in exploratory
factor analysis. EGA utilizes a graphical representation of data and community detection
algorithms to delineate the underlying latent
variable structure. As already mentioned in the

(1)

Introduction, in a psychometric network where

In our case, the EFA produced a clustering of

tions between items after controlling for all

1

𝑃(𝐺, 𝐶) = ∑𝑘𝑖=1 max|𝐶𝑖 ∩ 𝐶𝑗 |
𝑁
𝑗

∈ [0,1].

items across three factors with a purity score of
.88. The EFA retrieved the Depression subscale
perfectly but it also contained small allocation
errors between the Stress and the Anxiety
scales, due to the fact that some items loaded
on both relative factors with standardised loadings ≥ .30.

items are nodes, the edges represent associaother items (Costantini et al., 2019; Epskamp et
al., 2018).
In the first step of EGA - see for references
(Christensen et al., 2018; Golino & Epskamp,
2017; Golino et al., 2020) - a network is constructed by employing filtering methods like
graphical lasso (GLASSO). Graphical lasso utilizes a lasso penalty to shrink small partial correlations towards zero, thus resulting in a

advances.in/psychology

7

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

Stanghellini et al., 2024

sparse network, whereas TMFG (Triangulated

discarding spurious correlations, followed by a

Maximally Filtered Graph) (Golino et al., 2020;

walktrap algorithm for detecting psychometric

Massara et al., 2016) is an algorithm that selects

factors as network communities.

the three-variable cliques (triangles) with the
highest mutual information in the network.
Both methods aim to capture only substantial
relationships among variables (items), allowing
the reduction of spurious edges due to sample

We comment on the results of this technique in
the Results section, where we present results as
obtained from the EGAnet package in R, version

1.2.3,

available

here

(Last

Accessed:

fluctuations. The next step is to identify com-

17/07/2023).

munities (clusters) of nodes, which is achieved

2.2.3 Creation of the Textual Forma Mentis
Network (TFMN)

by employing the walktrap algorithm - a community detection method based on random
walks (Newman, 2018).

(TFMNs) to cognitively map beliefs and atti-

Communities identified in EGA are regarded as
potential factors, with items (nodes) belonging
to the same community loading onto the same
latent factor. In this regard, the walktrap algorithm facilitates the detection of clusters within
the network by performing short random
walks and by not requiring the number K of
factors as an input.

more likely to stay within the same community
because there are more edges within communities than between communities. The outcome of this analysis is a suggested factor solution (Epskamp & Fried, 2018), with a number of
factors determined by the walktrap algorithm
itself, that maximally represents the structure
inherent in the data. The walktrap algorithm is
stochastic so its results can change unless the
network structure is strongly clustered. This
poses the attention to the need to check for robust item allocations across factors, as evidenced in Figure A2 (bottom). Consequently,
the EGA approach offers a robust and intuitive
methodology for exploratory factor analysis,
particularly advantageous when there is no a
theory

to

tudes from textual data, where words (nodes)
are interconnected by semantic and syntactic
relationships (edges; Stella, 2020). Here, syntactic relationships explore grammatical dependencies between words (e.g. "love" and "weakness" in "love is weakness"), while semantic relationships probe meanings and their overlap
(e.g. "weakness" and "issue" being synonyms in
some contexts).

The underlying rationale is that these walks are

priori

We harness Textual Forma Mentis Networks

guide

factor

extraction

(Epskamp & Fried, 2018).

EmoAtlas, the tool we used here, combines AI
and psychological lexicons to construct TFMNs
(Semeraro et al., 2023). The tool is available on
GitHub

(https://github.com/alfon-

sosemeraro/emoatlas) in Python and we used
its first version (Last Accessed: 12/07/2023).
Firstly, EmoAtlas tokenises text into discrete
units or "tokens", i.e. words and punctuation in
any given sentence. Then, by examining the
text’s

grammatical

architecture,

EmoAtlas

identifies syntactic relationships in each and
every sentence of a text. These relationships
form a syntactic tree, i.e. a dependency model
illustrating word interactions. For instance, in
the sentence "this network rocks", the words
"this" and "network" are syntactically dependent on "rocks". EmoAtlas constructs these trees
using a multilayer perceptron model in spaCy
(cf.

spaCy

dependency

parser:

The network was obtained using the cor_auto

https://spacy.io/api/dependencyparser, Last Ac-

parameter, which automatically computes a

cessed: 12/07/2023).

correlation matrix based on polychoric, polyserial and/or Pearson correlations (we used the
latter). Then, a GLASSO approach was used for
advances.in/psychology

What sets TFMNs apart from other co-occurrence networks (Joseph et al., 2023; Quispe et

8

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

Stanghellini et al., 2024

al., 2021)? Unlike typical text analyses, which fo-

to cluster together? This information is inte-

cus on word co-occurrences, TFMNs do not link

grated into the TFMN, enriching the network

words close in sentences, since their proximity

representation with emotional information and

might be an effect of grammar rules rather

thereby creating a more comprehensive map

than cognitive associations (Aitchison, 2012;

of the text’s knowledge (Semeraro et al., 2023).

Quispe et al., 2021). Instead, textual forma mentis networks focus on syntactically related
words, thus close on the undirected syntactic
dependency tree (Stella, 2020, 2022). Thus, cooccurring

but

syntactically

disconnected

words are not linked. This approach ensures
flexibility and a more accurate representation
of syntactic meanings (Semeraro et al., 2022).
TFMNs only link words that are at a syntactic
tree distance (D) less than a set value (T), usually 3, based on studies showing most meaning
processing in English occurs below such syntactic distances because of feature economy in
language processing (Ferrer i Cancho & Diaz-

To improve readability, TFMNs can make larger
the font size of words that are more central in
the network structure. Centrality can be determined in different ways, be it semantic richness/degree (the number of links a concept engages in, see also Semeraro et al., 2022) or closeness centrality (which captures the semantic
prominence of a word across different contexts;
see also Stella, 2022). Closeness centrality captures centrality as the inverse average network
distance separating one node from all its connected ones (Newman, 2018). Thus, the more
central a node is, the closer it is to all other

Guilera, 2007).

nodes. For a given node/concept v, in a con-

Next, EmoAtlas introduces synonym links from

centrality (C(v)) is defined as:

nected TFMN G with N nodes, the closeness

WordNet (Miller, 1995), creating semantic con𝐶(𝑣) =

nections between words with overlapping
meanings. Semantic enrichment is performed

𝑁−1

,

(2)

∑𝑢≠𝑣 𝑑(𝑣,𝑢)

by only building semantic links between any

where d(v, u) is the shortest path distance be-

two words pre-existing in the syntactic struc-

tween nodes v and u, i.e. the smallest number

ture of a text, i.e. no synonyms are added ex

of links that connect nodes u and v. In Figure 3,

novo in the network (Semeraro et al., 2023;

node sizes are directly proportional to closeness

Stella, 2020). Lastly, the resulting network is en-

centrality.

riched with psycholinguistic data from vali-

2.2.4 Community Detection in TFMNs for
Identifying Semantic Communities

dated psychological lexicons - the National Re-

search Council Emotion Lexicon (S. M. Mohammad & Turney, 2013) and the National Research
Council Valence, Arousal, and Dominance Lexicon (S. Mohammad, 2018).

Here we are interested in extracting key topics
or the so-called semantic clusters or communities from the knowledge structured in a given
TFMN. These communities represent key ideas

This hybrid AI/lexicon approach is particularly

or semantic areas described across items of a

powerful because it allows TFMNs to leverage

given questionnaire and which we want to re-

the strengths of both AI and psychological lex-

construct through an automatic approach, re-

icons (Stella, 2022). The AI component facili-

lying on TFMNs (Stella, 2020) and community

tates the processing of large amounts of text

detection (Newman, 2012).

and the identification of complex syntactic and
semantic relationships. On the other hand, the
psychological lexicons provide a solid empirical
foundation for interpreting the perceptions of
clusters of words, e.g. did negative words tend

advances.in/psychology

Network science conceptualises communities
as clusters of nodes that are densely connected
internally, while sparingly linked with nodes
from other clusters (Citraro & Rossetti, 2020;
Newman, 2012). In the context of TFMNs and

9

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

Stanghellini et al., 2024

Table 1
Measures for Each Community Detection Algorithm, Identifying Semantic Communities in the TFMN. For
each set of communities, we test: (i) the resulting modularity, (ii) the number of communities, (iii) the average
community size, i.e. how many words are there in average in a community, and (iv) the number of singletons,
i.e. communities made of one word only.
Community Detection
Algorithm

Modularity

# Communities

Average Community Size

# Singletons

Louvain

0.44

9

12 ± 3

0

Centrality-Based

0.44

19

6±1

6

Clique Percolation

0.12

16

7±5

11

Hierarchical Clustering

0.28

15

7±3

5

Spectral Partitioning

0.42

15

7±1

2

cognitive networks, these communities can
generally represent semantic frames or key
topics surrounding prominent ideas in texts
and have been explored in past studies for understanding key perceptions in social media
data about the gender gap in science (Stella,
2020), key feelings as expressed by online users
in mental health discussion on Reddit (Joseph
et al., 2023), and in reconstructing semantic
frames of specific concepts in the mental lexicon (Citraro & Rossetti, 2020). To the best of our
knowledge, this work is the first application of
semantic community finding through TFMNs
in psychometric scales.

the weights of the edges incident to vertex i, ci
is the community to which vertex i is assigned
in the community partition, the delta function
δ(u, v) is 1 if u = v and 0 otherwise, and m is the
number of all of the edges/connections in the
graph. Maximising modularity is only one way
among many others for finding an appropriate
set of communities for a given network. Other
variables that need to be checked in our cognitive approach rely on size consistency, e.g. all
communities should have the same order of
magnitude of words, and on the absence of singletons,

i.e.

communities

made

of

one

word/node only. Different algorithms for community detection can be tested across these

The problem of partitioning a network in nonoverlapping communities can be quantified in
terms of modularity. Modularity is a quantitative measure used to evaluate the quality of
community structure in a network. It gauges
the density of links inside communities as compared to the links between communities. In essence, modularity quantifies the degree to
which a network can be subdivided into clearly
delineated communities. It can be formally defined as the fraction of the edges that fall
within the given network groups minus an expected fraction relative to what would happen
if edges were distributed at random (Newman,
2012, 2018):

measurements, including the Louvain algorithm, the centrality-based method, clique percolation, hierarchical clustering and spectral
partitioning. We compared these algorithms in
Table 1, where we select the Louvain algorithm
as the model with the highest modularity, the
smallest number of different semantic communities and the only model avoiding singletons.
We thus focus on explaining only this method
and refer the interested reader to (Newman,
2018) for the other methods.
The Louvain algorithm is a widely used method
for detecting communities in large networks
(Blondel et al., 2008). It operates as a two-phase
iterative process. In the first phase, the algo-

𝑄=

1
2𝑚

𝑘𝑘

∑𝑖𝑗 (𝐴𝑖𝑗 − 𝑖 𝑗 ) 𝛿(𝑐𝑖 , 𝑐𝑗 ),
2𝑚

(3)

where Aij denotes the presence or weight of the
edge between i and j, ki represents the sum of

advances.in/psychology

rithm optimises modularity locally. Each node
is initially considered a community in itself.
Then, for each node, the change in modularity

Q is calculated when it is removed from its current community and placed in the community

10

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

Stanghellini et al., 2024

of each of its neighbours. If a positive gain in

{Sa} as clusters of prominent ideas in the nar-

modularity is possible, then the node is placed

ratives of items.

in the community for which the gain is maximised. This process is repeated iteratively until no

• psychometric networks in the form of ex-

further increase in modularity is possible. In the

ploratory graph analysis (Golino & Epskamp,

second phase, a new network is constructed

2017) encode non-spurious correlations be-

where each node represents a community

tween items in the questionnaire, outlining

from the first phase. Self-loops are then created

how participants tended to rate different ex-

to

periences, e.g. in similar or in contrastive

represent

intra-community

edges.

Weighted edges, representing the number of

ways.

links between communities, are built across

weighted but undirected and it has been fil-

communities. Once this new aggregated net-

tered through model selection (Costantini et

work is built, it goes through the first phase.

al., 2019). This network is a proxy for the struc-

The entire process is then repeated until there

ture of psychological constructs influencing

is no further improvement in modularity. The

the responses of respondents (Christensen

final outcome can be stochastic or determinis-

et al., 2020; Golino et al., 2020). Such psycho-

tic, according to the specific implementation of

logical structure evidently depends on the

the algorithm, in case random fluctuations to

questionnaire responses. From such a net-

achieve more quickly local maxima of Q are

work, we extracted psychometric factors {Pb}

considered or not (Newman, 2012, 2018). In our

as clusters of items whose responses tended

case, we used the deterministic implementa-

to be the most similar to each other and thus

tion of the algorithm in Mathematica 13.1 (see

reflected latent psychological variables or di-

documentation

mensions.

here,

Last

Accessed:

18/07/2023).
2.3 Introducing semantic loadings: Bridging
the semantics of TFMN with network psychometrics

This

network

structure

comes

Notice that, in the end, semantic communities
{Sa} are collections of words, as reported also in
Figure 3. Instead, psychometric factors {Pb} are
collections of items, as reported in Figure 2

As described in the above sections, from a

(top). However, these factors can be mapped

given psychometric dataset with a scale it is

into collections of words too by tokenising and

possible to extract two types of complex net-

then joining the wordings of the items they are

works:

made of. For instance, if in a fictional factor,

• cognitive networks such as textual forma
mentis networks (Stella, 2020) encode semantic/syntactic/emotional associations between concepts as described in the word-

there were three items with the wordings "I feel
angry", "I feel sad", and "I feel enraged", respectively, the corresponding semantic factors
would be {“I”, “feel”, “angry”, “sad”, ”enraged”}.

ings of specific items. This network structure

We introduce semantic loadings Lab as the Jac-

comes unweighted and undirected but with

card index between semantic communities {Sa}

links of multiple types (i.e. syntactic specifi-

and semantic factors {Fb}, as constructed from

cations and synonyms). This network is a

psychometric factors {Pb} through tokenisation

proxy for the structure of knowledge which

and joining duplicates:

stimulated the semantic and autobiographical memories of respondents to items in the
questionnaire (Aitchison, 2012). Such struc-

𝐿𝑎𝑏 =

|𝑆𝑎 ∩ 𝐹𝑏 |
|𝑆𝑎 ∪ 𝐹𝑏 |

,

(4)

ture of knowledge is independent of the

where the numerator represents the number of

questionnaire responses. From such a net-

common concepts between a semantic com-

work, we extracted semantic communities

munity in the TFMN Sa and the group of words

advances.in/psychology

11

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

Figure 2
Psychometric Network as Obtained from the
EGANet Package (Top) and Item Stability Analysis (Bottom). In a psychometric network,
nodes represent items and connections represent correlations surviving a graphical lasso
feature selection. Green links indicate positive
correlations.

Stanghellini et al., 2024

where 0 indicates no overlap and 1 indicates
complete overlap or identical sets. In order to
maximise overlap, we compute semantic loadings between sets of words that are stemmed,
i.e. whose suffixes or declinations have been removed, so that concepts like "happiness" or
"happy" and "worse" or "bad", among many others, are counted as being the same.
Notice that in the above description, we focused on psychometric factors as being obtained from an exploratory graph analysis, because of the emphasis of this manuscript between cognitive and psychometric networks.
However, the above definition of semantic loadings still applies also in the case of factor analyses or other ways to cluster psychometric
items together.
Once empirical semantic loadings are measured for a given TFMN and set of psychometric
factors, semantic communities can be reshuffled at random, while fixing their lengths, to
produce sets of random semantic loadings
{L∗ab}.

Such simulation data can be used

through direct sampling for producing statistical estimates of the probability of getting the
empirically observed semantic loadings by
mere chance, due to fluctuations in the underlying data. Here we simulated 1000 random allocations of the same empirical concepts across
semantic communities and then resorted to a
location hypothesis test (i.e. signed rank test) to
check whether the observed semantic loading
{Lab} was compatible with the resulting random
semantic loadings {L∗ab}, fixing a .05 significance level.

3. RESULTS
This section outlines our main findings along
three stages: (i) comparing psychometric factors from network psychometrics with those
from factor analysis, (ii) highlighting semantic
communities in the DASS scale with textual

Fb induced by a psychometric factor Pb, while

forma mentis networks, and (iii) testing the

the denominator represents the total number

presence and loadings of semantic communi-

of concepts mentioned in both Sa and Pb. The

ties

across

the

most

easily

interpretable

Jaccard Index thus ranges between 0 and 1,
advances.in/psychology

12

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

psychometric factors.
3.1 Comparing Factor Analysis and Network
Psychometric Results
Figure 2 reports the factor analysis as obtained
from EGA in the form of a psychometric network (top) and its item robustness analysis
(bottom). The EGA identified four psychometric
factors, different from factor analysis (see
Methods):
•

Network Factor 1: {D = {31, 42, 24, 16, 5, 3, 10,
26, 13, 37, 38, 21, 34, 17}, A = ∅, D = ∅};

•

Network Factor 2: {S = {14, 35, 32, 29, 27, 6, 1,
11, 18, 39, 22, 8}, A = ∅, D = ∅};

•

Stanghellini et al., 2024

2005), nervousness is mapped into negative valence and arousal is obviously mapped into
high arousal, the resulting region where items
with wordings about "Nervous Arousal" should
appear, in the circumplex model, would be the
quadrant for anxiety. Hence, it is expected for
items 12 and 33 to belong to anxiety-focused
factors even from non-clinical but relevant psychology literature. Notice that the current results remain unchanged even after updating
EGAnet to its newer version (as of December
2023).
Last but not least, over 50 random iterations of
the walktrap items, i.e. when performing a
Bootstrap Graph Exploratory Analysis (Chris-

Network Factor 3: {S = ∅, A = {19, 2, 23, 7, 41, 4,

tensen & Golino, 2021), always 4 factors were

25, 15}, D = ∅};

identified and retrieved. 40 out of 42 items were
furthermore allocated always to the same fac-

•

Network Factor 4: {S = {12, 33}, A = {9, 40, 30,

tors, whereas items Q22A and Q8A (“A” stand-

20, 36, 28}, D = ∅}.

ing for "answers" in the original dataset) were

The network factors reproduce the DASS subscales with a purity P ≈ 0.95, superior to the pu-

allocated to factors different from 2 for 8% of
the times.

rity score obtained by factor analysis. For this

This is expected since, from the network layout,

quantitative comparison, considering both

those two items are bridges (Epskamp et al.,

EFA and EGA provided similarly sized factors,

2018) connecting factors 1, 2 and 4. Notice that

we considered network psychometrics as

we tried bootstrapping with 50, 100, 500 and

providing a better allocation of items across

1000 iterations and we did not notice qualita-

factors. Noticeably, by investigating the spe-

tive differences, i.e. items 8 and 22 were placed

cific items, one can spot that EGA produces a

in other factors more than 5% but less than 25%

finer structure for the Anxiety subscale, split-

of the times. Since our allocation rates were

ting it into two factors that could not be identi-

higher than the 75% rate mentioned in a past

fied with EFA. In EGA, these two factors corre-

investigation with the reduced DASS-21 scale

spond with two separate aspects of Anxiety, or-

(Van den Bergh et al., 2021), relative to the inves-

ganised along different sub-subscales, namely

tigation of the same psychological constructs

Physical Anxiety (relative to psycho-somatic

investigated in here, we decided to retain items

symptoms of anxious states, Network Factor 3)

Q22A ("I found it hard to wind down") and Q8A

and Emotional Anxiety (relative to emotional

("I found it hard to relax") in Network Factor 2,

aspects of anxious states, Network Factor 4).

overlapping mostly with Stress.

EGA reproduced the whole Depression subscale (Network Factor 1) and 12 out of 14 items
in the Stress subscale (Network Factor 2).

3.2 Community Structure of the TFMN for the
DASS Scale
Figure 3 reports the textual forma mentis net-

Noticeably, the EGA added to Emotional Anxi-

work for all items in the DASS scale (see Meth-

ety also two items from the "Nervous Arousal"

ods). Synonym relationships are highlighted in

Stress subscale. Considering that in models like

green. Syntactic relationships between con-

the circumplex model of affect (Posner et al.,

cepts/nodes are highlighted in grey (between

advances.in/psychology

13

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

Stanghellini et al., 2024

neutral words), in cyan (between positive

"I" in the centre community, i.e. "I" is the most

words), in red (between negative words), or in

prominent concept across all different contexts

purple (between negative and positive words).

mentioned in the psychometric scale (close-

Communities are encircled in black bubbles.

ness score C ≈ .76), as expected from test design

Although the Louvain algorithm identified 9

methods (Paulhus & Vazire, 2007). In fact, DASS

semantic communities, we clustered together

is a self-reported assessment which focuses on

the trivial community {”enthusiastic”, ”unable”}

personal evaluation about one’s self and per-

with the one mentioning ”state”, for improving

sonal symptoms of emotional distress (Lov-

interpretability.

ibond & Lovibond, 1995): It is thus expected for

As mentioned in the Methods, in Figure 3 node

"I" to be central in the narrative of items here.

sizes are directly proportional to closeness cen-

Whereas "I" is a rather general concept, related

trality. The word with the highest closeness is

to the concept of the self, its syntactic

Figure 3
Textual Forma Mentis Network (TFMN) Representing Syntactic/Semantic Associations Between
Concepts as Expressed in the DASS Items. Nodes are highlighted in red (cyan, black) if perceived
with negative (positive, neutral) valence by participants in a psychological mega-study (cf. Stella
(2020)). Syntactic links between positive (negative, neutral) words are in cyan (red, grey). Syntactic links between a positive and a negative word are in purple. Green links indicate synonyms.
Words are clustered in communities as obtained from the Louvain method.

advances.in/psychology

14

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

Stanghellini et al., 2024

associates can better provide insights into the

negative mentions about irritability and physi-

context where "I" is mentioned, across DASS

cal weakness ("irritable", "faintness", "shaki-

items. These associates, within the same se-

ness"). Analogously to the APA-assisted process

mantic community of "I", include negative con-

used for Emotional Dysregulation, we termed

cepts like "upset", "impatient", "agitated", "fear",

this semantic community "Feeling Irritable" to

"unfamiliar" and "difficult", as well as positive

sum up the experiential and faint-related men-

concepts linked to a negation ("not") such as

tions.

(not) "relax" and (not) "calm". The same community features also neutral concepts mentioning social contexts ("work") and blander
concepts like "tolerate", "thrown" or "wind".
Given the presence of these contrasting emotional states related to the self, we discussed
the content of this semantic community and
related it to past relevant literature about
emotional dysregulation (Hofmann et al., 2012),
based on a combination of human coding and
lexical search on the APA Dictionary of Psychology (available at https://dictionary.apa.org/,
Last Accessed: 18/07/2023).
GPT4

from

OpenAI

https://chat.openai.com/,

The other semantic community at the left bottom of Figure 3 combined positive but negated
mentions like (not) "good" and "reason", (not)
"pretty", (not) "worthwhile" and (not) "interest".
These aspects were syntactically linked with
negative concepts

like "sad",

"depressed",

"scared", "terrified", "meaningless" and "worthless". These concepts all combine the expression of meaninglessness with more fearful/alarmed feelings of emotional exhaustion. In
line with the APA Dictionary for these terms
and with ChatGPT, we termed this community
as "Emotional Exhaustion", which was found to

(available
Last

at

be a key manifestation of neuroticism in past

Accessed:

psychological inquiries (Alarcon et al., 2009;

18/07/2023) confirmed the same summary of

Alessandri et al., 2018). The semantic communi-

the semantic/emotional content of this com-

ties "Tension State" and "Panic State" were eas-

munity, i.e. labelling it as "Emotional Dysregu-

ier to get semantically identified, since they re-

lations". Words in this "Emotional Dysregula-

spectively mentioned "tension" and "panic" to-

tion" community did not display higher close-

gether with synonym jargon. According to the

ness centralities compared to words outside of

APA Dictionary, panic is a more negative state,

this semantic community (α = 0.05, Kruskal −

relative to higher levels of arousal, whereas ten-

Wallis test, KW = 1.91, p = .164). Three other se-

sion is a more nuanced condition, relative to

mantic communities, on the left in Figure 3,

psychological or physical strain. This is reflected

mentioned mostly physical symptoms of anxi-

in relevant clinical psychology research, which

ety, stress or depression, but clustered seman-

distinguishes between these two states (Van

tically around the key ideas of breathing issues,

den Bergh et al., 2021).

sweating and physiological arousal. The occurrence of these physical manifestations of emotional distress is well-known in clinical psychology, hence their inclusion in the DASS scale
(Lovibond & Lovibond, 1995). These symptoms
were mentioned also by social media users engaging in mental health discourse on Reddit
(Joseph et al., 2023).

3.3 Semantic Loadings for Network Psychometric Factors
Figure 4 shows the relation between the semantic factors extracted by means of the psychometric network approach and the semantic
communities extracted by the TFMN. As it can
be seen through the inspection of the semantic
loadings, the latent factor of Depression as

The semantic community at the center bottom

identified from network psychometrics over-

of Figure 3 includes mostly positive experiential

laps with 5 semantic communities (L > 0) but

concepts ("feeling, experience, find", "go") and

only three semantic loadings are statistically
significant: The highest value is "Emotional

advances.in/psychology

15

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

Stanghellini et al., 2024

Exhaustion" (L = .36, p < .001), followed by "Emo-

statistically significant: "Sweating" (L = .30, p <

tional Dysregulation" (L = .21, p < .001) and "Feeling Irritable" (L = .14, p < .001). Furthermore,

.001), "Physiological Arousal" (L = .24, p < .001),
"Briefing Issues" (L = .18, p < .001), all ideas rela-

Stress, as identified by EGA, significantly over-

tive to physical symptoms and followed closely

laps with three semantic communities, with

by "Feeling Irritable" (L = .18, p < .001). Last but

the highest value being the one of "Emotional

not least, the EGA-identified facet of Emotional

Dysregulation" (L = .38, p < .001) (differently

Anxiety overlaps with four semantic communi-

from Depression), followed by "Feeling Irrita-

ties, although only three semantic loadings are

ble" (L = .19, p < .001) and "Panic State" (L = .09, p

statistically significant: "Panic State" (L = .36, p <

< .001). The EGA-identified facet of Physical
Anxiety overlaps with 6 semantic communities,

.001), "Tension State" (L = .20, p < .001) and "Emotional Dysregulation" (L = .11, p < .1).

although

only

4

semantic

loadings

are

Figure 4
Semantic Loadings Obtained as the Overlap (Jaccard index) Between the Psychometric Semantic Factors and the TFMN Semantic Factors. Each semantic loading was compared against numerical simulations randomising psychometric semantic factors. Statistically significant loadings were highlighted with one (p-value ∈].1, .01]), two (p-value <∈].01, .001]) or three (p-value <
.001) stars.

advances.in/psychology

16

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

4. DISCUSSION
The linchpin of our study resides in the exploration of a potential interplay between the semantic/syntactic associations in the items of a
psychometric scale (DASS) and the correlations
between item responses provided by individuals. Grounded in the theoretical perspective
that an individual’s interaction with an item introduces a web of networked conceptual associations (Stella, 2022), we hypothesise that
these associations play a significant role in the
subsequent appraisal and response to the
item. This premise manifests in two primary assertions: One, the semantic/syntactic associations potentially cluster concepts together; and
two, these concept clusters directly can influence the individual’s perceived item response
(Y. Li et al., 2020; Mace & Unlu, 2020). In this con-

Stanghellini et al., 2024

Our data-driven psychometric approach offers
several insights that can be interpreted for the
advancement of theoretical literature. The
loadings of semantic communities over semantic factors have the potential to advance psychopathology literature tracking similarities
and differences between mood-, stress-, and
anxiety-related phenomena (e.g., Sharma et al.,
2016) in several ways. In what follows, we provide a thorough interpretation of the findings
reported in Figure 4. First, we focus on a rowwise reading of semantic loadings from Figure
4 and then proceed with a column-wise interpretation. Lastly, we outline potential future applications and limitations of our proposed approach.
4.1 Interpretation of Semantic Communities
with Respect to Semantic Factors

text, we posit that the network structure of se-

We have found that those items having seman-

mantic/syntactic relationships, such as those

tic contents related to "Emotional Dysregula-

existing between “I” and “feel” or “feel” and

tion" proved to significantly overlap with 3 out

“sad” in “I feel sad”, might shed psychological

of 4 latent dimensions. This empirical result is

insights into the way semantic clusters of ideas

consistent with a previous theoretical review,

characterise specific psychometric factors.

which highlighted the pivotal role played by

To examine our hypotheses, we have employed
the cognitive network framework of textual
forma mentis networks (Semeraro et al., 2023;
Stella, 2020) along with graph exploratory analysis for psychometric networks (Christensen et
al., 2020; Epskamp & Fried, 2018; Epskamp et al.,
2018; Golino & Epskamp, 2017). The powerful
combination of these methodologies allows us
to undertake an in-depth quantitative analysis
of the collected data. Remarkably, our findings
corroborate our initial conjecture: DASS items
do tend to cluster in factors that group concepts in a non-random manner to the network
communities unearthed within syntactic/semantic forma mentis networks. This pattern
was observed consistently across the 39775 individual responses we analysed, offering a robust statistical foundation for our findings from

emotion regulation in affecting mood and anxiety disorders (Hofmann et al., 2012). In other
words, our automatic process is able to detect
and inform the experimenter about the centrality of emotional dysregulation, i.e. the inability
to manage and regulate emotions (Vogel et al.,
2021), across several manifestations of maladjustment and emotional distress indicators, further confirming previous theoretical reviews in
psychology (Hofmann et al., 2012). Despite this
spreading of "Emotional Dysregulation" across
aspects of depression, stress, and anxiety, it has
to be noted that semantic loadings for this semantic idea are stronger for depression and
stress compared to emotional aspects of anxiety. This might indicate differences still present
among these three manifestations of emotional distress.

a statistical perspective. Let us outline our re-

Furthermore, we have found that those items

sults and interpret them in view of their poten-

relative to "Sweating", "Breathing Issues", and

tial impact from a psychologically substantive

"Physiological Arousal" are significantly associ-

perspective.

ated only with the psychometric factor of

advances.in/psychology

17

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

Stanghellini et al., 2024

"Physical Anxiety": This finding offers the op-

models sharing the same irritable/over-reactive

portunity to specifically map these symptoms

items, "differences in model fit can be at-

as main characteristics of physical manifesta-

tributed to the different items that composed

tions of anxiety itself (Keogh et al., 2001), poten-

the Anxiety component" (Clara et al., 2001, p.

tially coming from psycho-somatic reactions to

66), hence supporting the value of our finding

anxious states. Conversely, "Tension State"

about the finer structure of DASS anxiety-re-

showed to be semantically related to the psy-

lated items. Last but not least, we have found

chometric dimension of Emotional Anxiety,

that those items having semantic contents re-

consistently with previous literature (Li et al.,

lated to Emotional Exhaustion mainly over-

2022).

lapped with the dimension of Depression. This

In this way, semantic loadings provide discriminant elements that may be used to unravel differences between physical vs. emotional traits
of anxiety. Note that this aspect was not captured by the output of our EFA: Results from

finding is consistent with previous studies that
linked Emotional Exhaustion and Depression
(e.g. Bianchi et al., 2021).
4.2 Interpretation of Semantic Factors with
Respect to Semantic Communities

the psychometric network analysis provided a

Looking at the semantic factors, we found that

finer description of anxiety as encoded in our

Depression significantly overlaps particularly

current dataset (N = 39775).

with the semantic communities of Emotional
Exhaustion, followed by Emotional Dysregula-

In addition, we have found that items having

tion and Feeling Irritable. Our semantic find-

semantic contents related to "Feeling Irritable"

ings indicate that depression is mainly charac-

are significantly associated with all dimensions

terised by semantic communities that are re-

but Emotional Anxiety. Differently from other

lated to a "negative" system of emotions, which

semantic communities, the range of significant

is consistent with common research attesting

semantic loadings for "Feeling Irritable" across

how "people with depression are more likely to

the 4 network factors is narrow (range: .14 − .19),

suffer from negative emotions than the general

suggesting that the component of irritability

population" (Bian et al., 2023, p. 230).

encoded in DASS provides similar aspects of
maladjustment across depression, stress and

Second, in terms of semantic loadings, stress

physical aspects of anxiety. In other words,

overlaps particularly with Emotional Dysregula-

these findings may point out that some as-

tion, followed by Feeling Irritable and Panic

pects of irritability - e.g., getting upset rather

State. This finding is consistent with research

easily, being touchy, getting agitated, having

attesting how emotional dysregulation in posi-

difficulties in relaxing (Lovibond & Lovibond,

tive and negative affect may negatively impact

1995) - are transversal semantic ideas that char-

overall functioning (Li et al., 2020; Vogel et al.,

acterise depression, stress and physical anxiety,

2021), thus creating the so-called "roller-coaster

but not emotional anxiety. This further under-

of emotions", where the individual is unable to

lines the necessity to separate physical vs. emo-

exert control on the variability of their emotions

tional aspects of anxiety. This distinction is an

(Madsgaard et al., 2022).

output that the EFA did not reach, while it was
obtained by our synergistic combination of
psychometric and cognitive networks, thus
supporting the utility of our proposed approach. Interestingly, a study that applied a
CFA to the DASS, more than 20 years ago raised
the issue that, despite some competing

advances.in/psychology

Third, Physical Anxiety significantly overlaps
with 3 physical semantic communities (Sweating, Physiological Arousal, and Breathing Issues), as well as with Feeling Irritable. Instead,
Emotional Anxiety overlaps mostly with psychological, rather than physical, symptoms of
mental distress, namely states of tension,

18

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

emotional

dysregulation

and,

most

Stanghellini et al., 2024

im-

interpretation

of

semantic

communities

portantly, with mentions of panic states. How-

(Semeraro et al., 2022). The integration or ag-

ever, despite this semantic distinction of these

gregation of meaning across semantically var-

two sub-components of anxiety, the de-facto

ied tokens — ranging from nouns and verbs to

standards of the DSM-5-TR indicate how cen-

qualifiers — requires considerable human ex-

tral both emotional and physical symptoms are

pertise. This limitation implies that without a re-

for a variety of anxiety disorders (American Psy-

fined level of human expertise, the derived

chiatric Association, 2022). This means that de-

meaning could potentially skew or be misinter-

spite the finer structure for the psychological

preted (Citraro & Rossetti, 2020). We here sug-

construct of Anxiety unveiled by psychometric

gest two viable solutions to overcome this limi-

networks and corroborated by semantic load-

tation: (i) integrate the semantic structure with

ings, clinical practitioners should focus on both

external data structures or databases to enrich

emotional and physical aspects of anxiety

its context; (ii) employ a distributional semantic

when dealing with anxiety disorders, such as

model or a generative AI to spot similarities

panic disorder (American Psychiatric Associa-

among words contained in a specific commu-

tion, 2022).

nity. With the current improvements of large
language models and their spreading in psy-

4.3 Limitations and Future Applications

chology (Semeraro et al., 2023), both options

As mentioned in the Introduction, one of the

could produce analyses where the labelling of

primary limitations noted in the structure of

semantic communities is corroborated by both

TFMNs is their inability to directly link its se-

humans and knowledge modelling systems.

mantic structure with the processing component of an item-based response (Cutler & Con-

Despite the above limitations, it is important to

don, 2023). Essentially, the TFMN’s design lends

underline that, from a scale validation perspec-

itself to a representation of the overall seman-

tive, semantic loadings (as introduced here) al-

tic structure across the entire set of items and

low experimenters to better inspect validity is-

their tokens (see also Stella, 2022), rather than

sues, such as the discriminant validity of the di-

an understanding of how the cognitive pro-

mensions (e.g. testing whether some factors

cessing of individual responses occurs. This dis-

would not overlap with hypothesised different

tinction essentially categorises the TFMN as a

semantic contents), external validity (e.g. test-

descriptive-phenomenological representation,

ing whether some factors would overlap with

sidelining it from cognitive processing models

hypothesised correlated semantic contents),

of individual responses but still providing valid

and – maybe most important – content validity

results in the presence of texts that can be

(e.g. testing whether the items supposed to re-

clearly understood by large populations, like

flect an unobserved construct effectively reflect

most psychometric scales can do by design

the hypothesised semantic underlying con-

(Christensen et al., 2023; Christensen et al.,

tent). Thus, our approach is consistent with re-

2020).

cent proposals, advancements, and integration
between machine learning techniques and

However, future investigations might address

personality assessment, in case the resulting AI

this aspect by building text appendices of psy-

models are framed within a rich psychological

chometric questionnaires, adapting to the cog-

theoretical framework (Bleidorn & Hopwood,

nitive memory of individuals, and providing

2019) and/or can be interpreted in view of cru-

greater resolution in the presence of more de-

cial cognitive theories thanks to explanaible AI

tailed data, always within the cognitive frame-

approaches (Baker et al., 2023; Samuel et al.,

work of forma mentis networks (Stella, 2020).

2023).

Another

challenge

advances.in/psychology

arises

from

the

19

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

Another intriguing direction for future research
would be investigating how semantic overlap
might influence overlap or correlations between psychometric scores, violating the local
independence assumption (Christensen et al.,
2023). Both Unique Variable Analysis - and its
weighted topological overlap (Christensen et
al. 2023) - and the O-information (Marinazzo et
al., 2022) represent intriguing techniques for
quantifying and potentially enable a tuning of
score correlations due to semantic similarity, in
view of additional data gatherings and experiments with human respondents.

5. CONCLUSIONS
This contribution offers a novel automatic approach, grounded in cognitive science and psychometrics, for understanding how the ideas
described across items of a certain psychometric scale correspond to psychological dimensions/factors, as identified from participants’
responses to that same scale. Our semantic
loadings can describe multiple features and
nuances present in psychometric factors. The
currently introduced methodological combination of textual forma mentis networks and
exploratory graph analysis may be used in future research to explore research questions
akin to the following one: "Are the dimensions
extracted by data (factors) consistent with the
semantic content of their items (TFMNs)?". We
are confident that this synergistic approach
can further open the way to better understanding psychometric scales and their resulting factors through automatic, yet psychologically informed, combinations of cognitive and psychological networks. We envision these techniques to further grow and better describe
how semantic and experiential aspects of psychological constructs influence thought, language, and meaning understanding.

6. REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT

Stanghellini et al., 2024

repository: https://osf.io/4eqkd/.

7. CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no competing interests.

REFERENCES
• Aitchison, J. (2012). Words in the mind: An

introduction to the mental lexicon. John
Wiley & Sons.
• Alarcon, G., Eschleman, K. J., & Bowling, N. A.
(2009). Relationships between personality
variables and burnout: A meta-analysis. Work

&

Stress,

23(3),

244–263.

https://doi.org/10.1080/02678370903282600
• Alessandri, G., Perinelli, E., De Longis, E.,
Schaufeli, W. B., Theodorou, A., Borgogni, L.,
Caprara, G. V., & Cinque, L. (2018). Job
burnout: The contribution of emotional
stability and emotional self-efficacy beliefs.

Journal of Occupational and Organizational
Psychology,
91(4),
823–851.
https://doi.org/10.1111/joop.12225
• American Psychiatric Association. (2022).

Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders
(5th
ed.,
text
rev.).
https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.books.978089042
5787
• Anastasi, A. (1988). Psychological Testing (6th
ed.). Macmillan.
• Baker, O., Montefinese, M., Castro, N., & Stella,
M. (2023). Multiplex lexical networks and
artificial

intelligence

unravel

cognitive

patterns of picture naming in people with
anomic

aphasia.

Research,

Cognitive
79,

Systems
43–54.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogsys.2023.01.007
• Bian, C., Zhao, W.-W., Yan, S.-R., Chen, S.-Y.,
Cheng, Y., & Zhang, Y.-H. (2023). Effect of
interpersonal

psychotherapy

on

social

functioning, overall functioning and negative
emotions for depression: A meta-analysis.

Journal of Affective Disorders, 320(1), 230–
240. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2022.09.119
• Bianchi, R., Verkuilen, J., Schonfeld, I. S.,

The code and the data required for reproduc-

Hakanen,

ing the results described in this manuscript are

Manzano-Garcıa, G., Laurent, E., & Meier, L. L.

available on this Open Science Foundation

(2021). Is burnout a depressive condition? A

advances.in/psychology

J.

J.,

Jansson-Fröjmark,

M.,

20

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

14-sample
analytic

meta-analytic

Clinical
9(4),

study.

Science,

and

Stanghellini et al., 2024

bifactor

Psychological
579–597.

forms: Examining psychometric network
filtering

Behavior

approaches.

Methods,

50,

Research
2531–2550.

https://doi.org/10.1177/2167702620979597

https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-018-1032-9

• Blondel, V. D., Guillaume, J.-L., Lambiotte, R.,

• Ciaglia, F., Stella, M., & Kennington, C. (2023).

& Lefebvre, E. (2008). Fast unfolding of

Investigating preferential acquisition and

communities in large networks. Journal of

attachment in early word learning through

statistical
mechanics:
Theory
and
experiment, 2008(10), Article P10008.

cognitive, visual and latent multiplex lexical

https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-

and its Applications, 612, Article 128468.

5468/2008/10/P10008

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2023.128468

networks. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics

• Borsboom, D., Deserno, M. K., Rhemtulla, M.,

• Citraro, S., & Rossetti, G. (2020). Identifying

Epskamp, S., Fried, E. I., McNally, R. J.,

and exploiting homogeneous communities

Robinaugh, D. J., Perugini, M., Dalege, J.,

in

Costantini, G., et al. (2021). Network analysis

Science,

of multivariate data in psychological science.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s41109-020-00302-1

Nature Reviews Methods Primers, 1(1), 58.

• Clara, I. P., Cox, B. J., & Enns, M. W. (2001).

https://doi.org/10.1038/s43586-021-00055-w
• Castro, N., & Siew, C. S. (2020). Contributions

labeled

networks.

Applied

Network

5,

Article

55.

Confirmatory

factor

analysis

Depression–Anxiety–Stress

of

the

Scales

in

of modern network science to the cognitive

depressed and anxious patients. Journal of

sciences:

representation and process. Proceedings of

Psychopathology
Assessment,

the Royal Society A, 476(2238), Article

https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1011095624717

Revisiting

research

spirals

of

20190825.

and
23(1),

Behavioral
61–67.

• Costantini, G., Richetin, J., Preti, E., Casini, E.,

https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.2019.0825

Epskamp, S., & Perugini, M. (2019). Stability

• Christensen, A. P., Garrido, L. E., & Golino, H.

and variability of personality networks. a

(2023). Unique variable analysis: A network

tutorial on recent developments in network

psychometrics

method

psychometrics. Personality and Individual

dependence.

Multivariate
58(6),

Research,

to

detect

local

Behavioral
1165-1182.

https://doi.org/10.1080/00273171.2023.219460
6

Differences,

136,

68–78.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2017.06.011
• Costello, A. B., & Osborne, J. (2005). Best
practices in exploratory factor analysis: Four

• Christensen, A. P., & Golino, H. (2021).

recommendations for getting the most from

dimensions via bootstrap exploratory graph

Practical
Assessment,
Research, and Evaluation, 10, Article 7.

analysis: A monte carlo simulation and

https://doi.org/10.7275/jyj1-4868

Estimating the stability of psychological

tutorial.

Psych,

3(3),

479–500.

https://doi.org/10.3390/psych3030032
• Christensen, A. P., Golino, H., & Silvia, P. J.

your

analysis.

• Cutler, A., & Condon, D. M. (2023). Deep lexical
hypothesis: Identifying personality structure
in natural language. Journal of Personality

(2020). A psychometric network perspective

and

on the validity and validation of personality

https://doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000443

trait questionnaires. European Journal of

Personality,

34(6),

1095–1108.

https://doi.org/10.1002/per.2265
• Christensen, A. P., Kenett, Y. N., Aste, T., Silvia,
P. J., & Kwapil, T. R. (2018). Network structure
of the wisconsin schizotypy scales–short

advances.in/psychology

Social

Psychology,

125(1),

173–197.

• Epskamp, S., & Fried, E. I. (2018). A tutorial on
regularized partial correlation networks.
• Psychological

Methods,

23(4),

617-674.

https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/met0000
167
• Epskamp, S., Maris, G., Waldorp, L. J., &

21

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

Borsboom,

D.

(2018).

Stanghellini et al., 2024

Network

https://doi.org/10.1002/da.21888

psychometrics. In P. Irwing, T. Booth, & D. J.

• Irish, M., & Piguet, O. (2013). The pivotal role of

Hughes (Eds.), The wiley handbook of

semantic memory in remembering the past

psychometric testing: A multidisciplinary
reference on survey, scale and test
development (Vol. 2, 953–986). Wiley Online

and imagining the future. Frontiers in

Library.

Behavioral

Neuroscience,

7,

Article

27.

https://doi.org/10.3389/fnbeh.2013.00027
• Joseph, S. M., Citraro, S., Morini, V., Rossetti, G.,

https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118489772.ch30

&

Stella,

M.

(2023).

Cognitive

network

• Fabrigar, L. R., Wegener, D. T., MacCallum, R.

neighborhoods quantify feelings expressed

C., & Strahan, E. J. (1999). Evaluating the use

in suicide notes and reddit mental health

of

communities.

exploratory

psychological

factor

analysis

Psychological

research.

Methods,

in

4(3),

272–299.

Physica
A:
Statistical
Mechanics and its Applications, 610, Article
128336.

https://doi.org/10.1037/1082-989X.4.3.272

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2022.128336

• Ferrer i Cancho, R., & Diaz-Guilera, A. (2007).

• Keogh, E., Dillon, C., Georgiou, G., & Hunt, C.

The global minima of the communicative

(2001).

energy of natural communication systems.

physical threat in physical anxiety sensitivity.

Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and
Experiment, 2007(06), Article P06009.

Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 15(4), 299–315.

https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-

2

• Golino, H., & Epskamp, S. (2017). Exploratory
analysis:

A

attentional

biases

for

https://doi.org/10.1016/S0887-6185(01)00065• Kline, R. B. (2016). Principles and practice of

5468/2007/06/P06009
graph

Selective

new

approach

for

structural equation modeling (4th ed.).
Guilford publications.

estimating the number of dimensions in

• Li, M., Xu, D., Ma, G., & Guo, Q. (2022). Strong

PloS one, 12(6),

tie or weak tie? Exploring the impact of

e0174035.

group-formation gamification mechanisms

psychological

research.

Article

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0174035

on

user

emotional

anxiety

Behaviour
41(11),

&

in

social

Information

• Golino, H., Shi, D., Christensen, A. P., Garrido,

commerce.

L. E., Nieto, M. D., Sadana, R., Thiyagarajan, J.

Technology,

A., & Martinez-Molina, A. (2020). Investigating

https://doi.org/10.1080/0144929X.2021.1917661

the

performance

analysis

and

of

exploratory

Emotional Recall Task: Juxtaposing recall

identify the number of latent factors: A

and recognition-based affect scales. Journal

Psychological

of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 46(9), 1782–1794.

and

Methods,

techniques

• Li, Y., Masitah, A., & Hills, T. T. (2020). The

to

simulation

traditional

graph

2294–2323.

tutorial.

25(3),

292–320.

https://doi.org/10.1037/met0000255
• Gorsuch,

R.

L.

(2013).

Factor

https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/xlm0000

analysis.

Psychology Press.

• Lovibond, P. F., & Lovibond, S. H. (1995). The

• Hills, T. T., & Kenett, Y. N. (2022). Is the mind a
network? Maps, vehicles, and skyhooks in
cognitive

Cognitive

network

Science,

841

science.

14(1),

Topics

structure

of

negative

emotional

states:

Comparison of the Depression Anxiety Stress

in

Scales (DASS) with the Beck Depression and

189–208.

Anxiety Inventories. Behaviour Research and

https://doi.org/10.1111/tops.12570
• Hofmann, S. G., Sawyer, A. T., Fang, A., &
Asnaani, A. (2012). Emotion dysregulation

Therapy,

33(3),

335–343.

https://doi.org/10.1016/0005-7967(94)00075U

model of mood and anxiety disorders.

• Mace, J. H., & Unlu, M. (2020). Semantic-to-

Depression and Anxiety, 29(5), 409–416.

autobiographical memory priming occurs

advances.in/psychology

22

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

Stanghellini et al., 2024

across multiple sources: Implications for

436–465.

autobiographical remembering. Memory &

8640.2012.00460.x

Cognition,

48,

931–941.

• Madsgaard, A., Smith-Strøm, H., Hunskår, I., &
K.

(2022).

A

rollercoaster of

emotions: An integrative review of emotions
and its impact on health professional
students’

learning

in

education.

Nursing

Open,

simulation-based

9(1),

• Newman, M. (2012). Communities, modules
and large-scale structure in networks. Nature

https://doi.org/10.3758/s13421-020-01029-1
Røykenes,

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-

Physics,

8(1),

25–31.

https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys2162
• Newman,

M.

Networks.

(2018).

Oxford

university press.
• Paivio,

A.

(1991).

Dual

coding

theory:

108–121.

Retrospect and current status. Canadian

• Marinazzo, D., Van Roozendaal, J., Rosas, F. E.,

Journal of Psychology / Revue canadienne de
psychologie,
45(3),
255–287.

https://doi.org/10.1002/nop2.1100
Stella,

M.,

Comolatti,

R.,

Colenbier,

N.,

Stramaglia, S., & Rosseel, Y. (2022). An
information-theoretic

approach

https://doi.org/10.1037/h0084295
• Paulhus, D. L., & Vazire, S. (2007). The self-

to

report method. In R. W. Robins, R. C. Fraley, &

hypergraph psychometrics. arXiv preprint

R. F. Krueger (Eds.), Handbook of research

arXiv:2205.01035.

methods in personality psychology (pp. 224–

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2205.01035

239). Guilford.

• Markus, K. A., & Borsboom, D. (2013). Frontiers

• Posner, J., Russell, J. A., & Peterson, B. S.

of test validity theory: Measurement,
causation, and meaning. Routledge.

(2005). The circumplex model of affect: An

• Massara, G. P., Di Matteo, T., & Aste, T. (2016).

neuroscience, cognitive development, and

integrative

approach

to

affective

Development
and
17(3),
715–734.

Network filtering for big data: Triangulated

psychopathology.

maximally filtered graph. Journal of complex

Psychopathology,

Networks,

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954579405050340

5(2),

161–178.

https://doi.org/10.1093/comnet/cnw015

• Quispe, L. V., Tohalino, J. A., & Amancio, D. R.

• Meléndez, J. C., Agusti, A. I., Satorres, E., &
Pitarque,

A.

(2018).

Are

semantic

and

(2021). Using virtual edges to improve the
discriminability

of

co-occurrence

text

memories

networks. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics

influenced by the life period remembered?

and its Applications, 562, Article 125344.

comparison of young and older adults.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2020.125344

European Journal of Ageing, 15(4), 417–424.

• Rattray, J., & Jones, M. C. (2007). Essential

episodic

autobiographical

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10433-018-0457-4
• Miller, G. A. (1995). Wordnet: A lexical

elements

of

questionnaire

16(2),

the

2702.2006.01573.x

38(11),

39–41.

https://doi.org/10.1145/219717.219748

and

development. Journal of Clinical Nursing,

database for english. Communications of

ACM,

design

234–243.

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-

• Rosenbusch, H., Wanders, F., & Pit, I. L. (2020).

• Mohammad, S. (2018). Obtaining reliable

The semantic scale network: An online tool to

human ratings of valence, arousal, and

detect semantic overlap of psychological

dominance

scales and prevent scale redundancies.

for

20,000

english

words.

Proceedings of the 56th annual meeting of
the association for computational linguistics
(volume
1:
Long
papers),
174–184.
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P18-1017
• Mohammad, S. M., & Turney, P. D. (2013).
Crowdsourcing a word–emotion association
lexicon. Computational Intelligence, 29(3),

advances.in/psychology

Psychological

Methods,

25(3),

380-392.

https://doi.org/10.1037/met0000244
• Rosseel, Y. (2012). lavaan: An R package for
structural equation modeling. Journal of

Statistical

Software,

48,

1–36.

https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v048.i02
• Rubin, D. C. (2005). A basic-systems approach

23

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

Stanghellini et al., 2024

Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 14(2),

concepts

79–83.

https://doi.org/10.1037/10694-000 .

to

autobiographical

memory.

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0963-

7214.2005.00339.x

and

applications.

Psychological

American
Association.

• Van den Bergh, N., Marchetti, I., & Koster, E. H.

• Samuel, G., Stella, M., Beaty, R. E., & Kenett, Y.

(2021).

Bridges

over

troubled

waters:

N. (2023). Predicting openness to experience

Mapping the interplay between anxiety,

via a multiplex cognitive network approach.

depression and stress through network

Journal of Research in Personality, 104,

analysis of the DASS-21. Cognitive Therapy

Article

and

104369.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2023.104369
&

Stella,

emotional

M.

(2023).

profiling

EmoAtlas:
tool

An

merging

psychological lexicons, artificial intelligence
and

network

45,

46–60.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10608-020-10153-w

• Semeraro, A., Vilella, S., Mohammad, S., Ruffo,
G.,

Research,

science.

Designing online
experiments for the social sciences. SAGE

• Veltri,

G.

A.

(2023).

Publications Limited.
• Vogel, A. C., Tillman, R., El-Sayed, N. M.,
Jackson, J. J., Perlman, S. B., Barch, D. M., &

https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-2428155/v1

Luby, J. L. (2021). Trajectory of emotion

• Semeraro, A., Vilella, S., Ruffo, G., & Stella, M.

dysregulation in positive and negative affect

(2022). Emotional profiling and cognitive

across

networks unravel how mainstream and

emotion

alternative press framed astrazeneca, pfizer

functioning.

and

covid-19

Scientific

vaccination

Reports,

12(1),

campaigns.

Article

14445.

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-18472-6
• Sharma, S., Powers, A., Bradley, B., & Ressler,
K.

J.

(2016).

Gene

x

childhood

predicts

dysregulation

adolescent

and

overall

Development
and
Psychopathology,
33(5),
1722–1733.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954579421000705
• Wood,

D.

(2015).

Testing

the

lexical

hypothesis: Are socially important traits more

environment

densely reflected in the English lexicon?

determinants of stress-and anxiety-related
disorders. Annual Review of Psychology, 67,

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
108(2),
317–335.

239–261.

https://doi.org/10.1037/a0038343

https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-

psych-122414-033408
• Siew, C. S., Wulff, D. U., Beckage, N. M., &
Kenett, Y. N. (2019). Cognitive network
science: A review of research on cognition
through the lens of network representations,
processes, and dynamics. Complexity, 2019,
Article

2108423

https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/2108423
• Stella, M. (2020). Text-mining forma mentis
networks reconstruct public perception of
the stem gender gap in social media. PeerJ

Computer

Science,

6,

Article

e295.

http://dx.doi.org/10.7717/peerj-cs.295
• Stella, M. (2022). Cognitive network science
for understanding online social cognitions: A
brief review. Topics in Cognitive Science,

14(1), 143–162. https://doi.org/10.1111/tops.12551
• Thompson, B. (2004). Exploratory and
confirmatory factor analysis: Understanding

advances.in/psychology

24

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

Stanghellini et al., 2024

Appendix

Factor Analysis
Table A1
Exploratory Factor Analysis Results as Obtained with Lavaan and a Varimax Rotation.
Number of factors: 3

Standardized loadings λ: (* = significant at 1% level)

Items

f1

Q1A

0.835*

Q2A

f2

0.381*

Q3A

0.645*

Q4A

0.693*

Q5A
Q6A

f3

0.533*
0.790*

Q7A

0.767*

Q8A

0.449*

Q9A

0.429*

0.343*

Q10A

0.827*

Q11A

0.871*

Q12A

0.382*

Q13A

0.309*

Q14A

0.649*

Q15A

0.446*
0.568*

0.551*

unique.var

communalities

0.401

0.599

0.751

0.249

0.407

0.593

0.483

0.517

0.457

0.543

0.495

0.505

0.430

0.570

0.501

0.499

0.526

0.474

0.316

0.684

0.372

0.628

0.456

0.544

0.345

0.655

0.661

0.339

0.579

0.421

Q16A

0.681*

0.400

0.600

Q17A

0.708*

0.346

0.654

0.630

0.370

0.662

0.338

Q18A
Q19A

0.645*
0.546*

Continued on next page

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

Stanghellini et al., 2024

Table A1 – continued from previous page
Items

f1

f2

Q20A

0.303*

0.411*

Q21A
Q22A

0.858*
0.495*

Q23A

0.549*

Q24A

0.608*

Q25A

0.625*

Q26A
Q27A

f3

0.530*
0.795*

Q28A

0.547*

unique.var

communalities

0.480

0.520

0.261

0.739

0.517

0.483

0.639

0.361

0.438

0.562

0.550

0.450

0.409

0.591

0.440

0.560

0.414

0.586

Q29A

0.708*

0.447

0.553

Q30A

0.396*

0.575

0.425

0.460

0.540

0.565

0.435

0.441

0.559

0.329

0.671

0.577

0.423

0.471

0.529

Q31A

0.622*

Q32A

0.658*

Q33A

0.364*

0.451*

Q34A
Q35A

0.720*
0.618*

Q36A

0.371*

Q37A

0.814*

0.354

0.646

Q38A

0.873*

0.272

0.728

0.487

0.513

0.329*

0.535

0.465

0.745*

0.476

0.524

0.587

0.413

Q39A

0.648*

Q40A

0.412*

Q41A
Q42A

0.431*

Introducing semantic loadings in factor analysis

Stanghellini et al., 2024

Table A2
Summary Statistics for the EFA with 3 Factors as Performed in Lavaan, with
an Oblimin Rotation.
f1

f2

f3

total

Sum of sq (obliq) loadings

8.873

7.685

5.502

22.060

Proportion of total

0.402

0.348

0.249

1.000

Proportion var

0.211

0.183

0.131

0.525

Cumulative var

0.211

0.394

0.525

0.525

f2

f3

Factor correlations:
f1
f1

1.

f2

.703*

1.

f3

.707*

.540*

1.

*p ≤ .01.

advances.in/psychology

27

