TYPE Hypothesis and Theory
PUBLISHED 26 June 2025
DOI 10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY

Alessandro Giuliani,
National Institute of Health (ISS), Italy
REVIEWED BY

Moritz Dechamps,
Ludwig Maximilian University of
Munich, Germany
Gianfranco Minati,
Italian Systems Society, Italy
Michele Luchetti,
Bielefeld University, Germany

Statistics is not measurement:
The inbuilt semantics of
psychometric scales and
language-based models
obscures crucial epistemic
differences

*CORRESPONDENCE

Jana Uher
mail@janauher.com
RECEIVED 25 November 2024

Jana Uher*
School of Human Sciences, University of Greenwich, London, United Kingdom

ACCEPTED 26 May 2025
PUBLISHED 26 June 2025
CITATION

Uher J (2025) Statistics is not measurement:
The inbuilt semantics of psychometric scales
and language-based models obscures crucial
epistemic differences.
Front. Psychol. 16:1534270.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270
COPYRIGHT

© 2025 Uher. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The
use, distribution or reproduction in other
forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are
credited and that the original publication in
this journal is cited, in accordance with
accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted
which does not comply with these terms.

Frontiers in Psychology

This article provides a comprehensive critique of psychology’s overreliance on
statistical modelling at the expense of epistemologically grounded measurement
processes. It highlights that statistics deals with structural relations in data
regardless of what these data represent, whereas measurement establishes
traceable empirical relations between the phenomena studied and the data
representing information about them. These crucial epistemic differences
are elaborated using Rosen’s general model of measurement, involving the
coherent modelling of the (1) objects of research, (2) data generation
(encoding), (3) formal manipulation (e.g., statistical analysis) and (4) result
interpretation regarding the objects studied (decoding). This system of
interrelated modelling relations is shown to underlie metrologists’ approaches
for tackling the problem of epistemic circularity in physical measurement,
illustrated in the special cases of measurement coordination and calibration.
The article then explicates psychology’s challenges for establishing genuine
analogues of measurement, which arise from the peculiarities of its study
phenomena (e.g., higher-order complexity, non-ergodicity) and language-based
methods (e.g., inbuilt semantics). It demonstrates that psychometrics cannot
establish coordinated and calibrated modelling relations, thus generating only
pragmatic quantiﬁcations with predictive power but precluding epistemically
justiﬁed inferences on the phenomena studied. This epistemic gap is often
overlooked, however, because many psychologists mistake their methods’
inbuilt semantics—thus, descriptions of their study phenomena (e.g., in rating
scales, item variables, statistical models)—for the phenomena described. This
blurs the epistemically necessary distinction between the phenomena studied
and those used as means of investigation, thereby confusing ontological
with epistemological concepts—psychologists’ cardinal error. Therefore, many
mistake judgements of verbal statements for measurements of the phenomena
described and overlook that statistics can neither establish nor analyze a model’s
relations to the phenomena explored. The article elaborates epistemological
and methodological fundamentals to establish coherent modelling relations
between real and formal study system and to distinguish the epistemic
components involved, considering psychology’s peculiarities. It shows that
epistemically justiﬁed inferences necessitate methods for analysing individuals’
unrestricted verbal responses, now advanced through artiﬁcial intelligence

01

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

systems modelling natural language (e.g., NLP algorithms, LLMs). Their increasing
use to generate standardised descriptions of study phenomena for rating scales
and constructs, by contrast, will only perpetuate psychologists’ cardinal error—
and thus, psychology’s crisis.
KEYWORDS

measurement, psychometrics, large language models (LLMs), natural language
processing (NLP), rating scales, modelling relation, semantics-syntax, metrology

1 Statistics vs. measurement

2023a). Process structures thus-established allow for deriving
epistemically justified information about specific quantities that are
assumed to exist in an object of research and for representing this
information in sign systems that are unambiguously interpretable
regarding those measurands (e.g., ‘TPers_A = 36.9◦ C’; ‘dPers_B =
16.2 mins/h’).
Statistics, by contrast, enables probabilistic descriptions of what
might happen as a consequence of complex, poorly understood
and possibly random events and processes as well as of constraints
that are set by stochastic boundaries (e.g., distribution curves).
In data sets, statistical methods allow us to identify regularities
beyond pure randomness, to group cases and compare groups
by their parameters, to model and extrapolate patterns as well
as to estimate error and uncertainty for justifying inferences
from samples to distribution patterns in hypothetical populations
(Romeijn, 2017). Statistics builds on theories that define the
workings of the analytical operations performed (e.g., mathematical
statistics, probability theory, item response theory). But it does not
build on theories about the objects of research that scientists may
aim to analyse for prevalences, differences and trends, and that
may be as diverse as diseases, therapeutic treatments, behaviours,
intellectual abilities, financial markets, policies and others. Statistics
is mute about the specific phenomena and properties analysed
(Strauch, 1976). That is, statistics concerns the analysis of data
sets regardless of what these data are meant to represent. Therefore,
it does not require a term denoting the specific quantity to be
measured in the real study objects—the measurand. This may
explain why most psychologists are unfamiliar with this basic term.
Their focus on ‘true scores’ in statistical modelling obscures the
epistemic distinction between the real quantity to be measured and
the measurement results used to estimate it (Strom and Tabatadze,
2022).
Statistics, however, is fundamental to so-called psychological
‘measurement’. Why?

Psychology cherishes its sophisticated ‘measurement’ and
modelling techniques for enabling quantitative research—the
hallmark of modern science. A closer look reveals, however, that
only methods of statistical data analysis are well elaborated, which
together with pertinent research designs (e.g., between-subjects)
fill our books and journals on psychological research methods.
This emphasis reflects the prevailing view that statistics constitutes
psychology’s approach for ‘measuring’ its non-observable study
phenomena (e.g., in psychometrics). This assumption, however, is
based on epistemic errors because statistics neither is measurement
nor is statistics necessary for measurement.

1.1 Different scientiﬁc activities for
different epistemic purposes
Measurement and measurement scales have been successfully
developed in physics and metrology—the science of physical
measurement and its application (JCGM100:2008, 2008, p. 2.2)—
long before statistics was invented (Abran et al., 2012; Fisher, 2009;
Uher, 2022b, 2023a). Measurement and statistics involve different
scientific activities designed for different epistemic (knowledgerelated) purposes.
Measurement requires traceable empirical interactions with
the specific quantities to be measured in the phenomena and
properties under study—the measurands (e.g., person A’s body
temperature but not A’s body weight or volume; person B’s
duration of speaking in a specific situation). Epistemically
justifiable inferences from observable indications of these empirical
interactions back to the measurands require theoretical knowledge
about both the object of research and the objects used as
measuring instruments as well as their conceptualisation in a
defined process structure within a realist framework (Mari et al.,
2021; Schrödinger, 1964; von Neumann, 1955). Its empirical
implementation necessitates unbroken documented connection
chains that establish proportional (quantitative) relations of the
results with both (1) the measurand’s unknown quantity (e.g.,
A’s body temperature; B’s duration of speaking)—the principle of
data generation traceability—and (2) a known reference quantity
(e.g., international units). This reference is necessary to establish
the results’ quantitative meaning regarding the specific property
studied (e.g., how warm or how long that is)—the principle
of numerical traceability (Uher, 2018a, 2020b, 2021c,d, 2022a,b,

Frontiers in Psychology

1.2 Psychological ‘measurement’:
Statistical analysis enabling pragmatic
quantiﬁcation
Psychological ‘measurement’ (e.g., psychometrics) is aimed
at discriminating well and consistently between cases (e.g.,
individuals, groups) and in ways considered important (e.g., social
relevance, relations to future outcomes). Therefore, ‘measuring
instruments’ (e.g., intelligence tests, rating ‘scales’) are designed

02

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

such as to generate data structures that are useful for these
purposes (e.g., specific distribution or association patterns). To this
pragmatic end, statistical analyses are indispensable (Uher, 2021c).
Many psychologists believe that measurement involves the
assignment of numbers and capitalises on their mathematically
defined quantitative meaning. In measurement, however, we
assign numerical values whose specific quantitative meaning is
conventionally agreed and traceable to defined reference quantities
(e.g., of the International System, SI; BIPM, 2019). We know this
from everyday life. The numerical values of ‘1 kilogram’, ‘2.205
pounds’, ‘35.274 ounces’ and ‘0.1575 stones’ differ—but they all
indicate the same quantity of weight. These differences originate
from once arbitrary decisions on specific quantities that were used
as references. Meanwhile, their specific quantitative meaning is
conventionally agreed and indicated by the measurement unit (e.g.,
‘kg’, ‘lb’, ‘oz’, ‘st’). The unit also indicates the specific kind of property
measured—‘1’ ‘kilogram’ is not ‘1’ ‘litre’, ‘1’ ‘metre’ or ‘1’ ‘volt’.
That is, the measurement unit specifies also a result’s qualitative
meaning, such as whether it is a quantity of weight, volume, length
or electric potential.
In psychology, by contrast, ‘measurement’ values are
commonly presented without a unit, thus indicating neither specific
qualities (e.g., frequency, intensity or level of agreement) nor
specific quantities of them (e.g., how often or how much of that).
Unit-free values—therefore called ‘scores’—are meaningless in
themselves. It requires statistics to first create quantitative meaning
for scores from their distribution patterns and interrelations within
specific samples (e.g., differential comparisons within age groups),
leading to reference group effects (Uher, 2021c,d, 2022a, 2023a).
Hence, psychometric scores constitute quantifications that are
created for specific uses, contexts and pragmatic purposes, such as
for making decisions or projections in applied settings (Barrett,
2003; Dawes et al., 1989; Newfield et al., 2022). This highlights first
important differences from genuine measurement.
Specifically, psychometric theories and empirical practices
clearly build on a pragmatic utilitarian framework that is aimed
at producing quantitative results with statistically desirable and
practically useful structures. By contrast, traceable relations
to empirical interactions with the quantities to be measured
(measurands) in individuals and to known reference quantities
are neither conceptualised nor empirically implemented.
Nevertheless, psychometricians explicitly aim for “measuring
the mind” (Borsboom, 2005)—thus, for ‘measuring’ specific
quantitative properties that individuals are assumed to possess.
Accordingly, psychometric results (e.g., IQ scores) are interpreted
as quantifications of the studied individuals’ psychical1 properties
(e.g., intellectual abilities) and used for making decisions about
these individuals (e.g., education). Here, psychometricians clearly

1

invoke the realist framework underlying physical measurement,
ignoring that they have theoretically and empirically established
instead only a pragmatic utilitarian framework (Uher, 2021c,d,
2022b, 2023a). This confusion of two incompatible epistemological
frameworks entails numerous conceptual and logical errors, as this
article will show (Section 3).
But regardless of this, psychometricians’ declared aims and
result interpretations highlight basic ideas of measurement that
are shared by metrologists, physicists and psychologists alike.
These ideas can be formulated as two epistemic criteria as the
most basic common denominators considered across the sciences
that characterise an empirical process as one of measurement.
Criterion 1 is the epistemically justified attribution of the
generated quantitative results to the specific properties to be
measured (measurands) in the study phenomena and to nothing
else. Criterion 2 is the public interpretability of the results’
quantitative meaning with regard to those measurands (Uher,
2020b, 2021a,b, 2023a). These two criteria are key to distinguish
genuine measurement from other processes of quantification
(e.g., opinions, judgements, evaluations). Importantly, this is not
to classify some approaches as ‘superior’ or ‘inferior’. Rather,
a criterion-based approach to define measurement is essential
for scrutinising the epistemic fundamentals of a field’s pertinent
theories and practices. This allowed for identifying, for example, the
epistemological inconsistencies inherent to psychometrics (Uher,
2021c,d). A criterion-based approach is also crucial for pinpointing
commonalities and differences between sciences.
Concretely, it shows that proposals to ‘soften’, ‘weaken’ or
‘widen’ the definition of measurement for psychology (Eronen,
2024; Finkelstein, 2003; Mari et al., 2015) are epistemically
mistaken. Certainly, psychology does not need the high levels of
measurement accuracy and precision, as necessary for sciences
like physics, chemistry and medicine where errors can lead to
the collapse of buildings, chemical explosions or drug overdoses.
But changing the definition of a scientific activity as fundamental
to empirical science as that of measurement cannot establish its
comparability across sciences. Much in contrast, it undermines
comparability because it fails to provide guiding principles that
specify how analogues of measurement that appropriately consider
the study phenomena’s peculiarities can be implemented in
other sciences. The methodological principles of data generation
traceability and numerical traceability, for example, can guide the
design of discipline-specific processes that allow for meeting the
two epistemic criteria of measurement also in psychology (Uher,
2018a, 2020b, 2022a,b, 2023a). Labelling disparate procedures
uniformly as ‘measurement’ also obscures essential and necessary
differences in the theories and practices established in different
sciences as well as inevitable limitations. Ultimately, measurement
is not just any activity to generate numerical data but involves
defined processes that justify the high public trust placed in it
(Abran et al., 2012; Porter, 1995).
In everyday life, the differences between measurement and
pragmatic quantification are obvious. When we buy apples in a
shop, we measure their weight. But we do not measure their price.
The apples’ weight is a quantitative property, which they possess
as real physical objects. It is determined through their traceable
empirical interaction with a measuring instrument (therefore, we

Here, the terms psychical and psychological (from Greek -logia for body

of knowledge) are distinguished to express the crucial distinction between
ontological concepts describing the objects of research themselves (e.g.,
mental, emotional) and epistemological concepts describing the means for
exploring these objects of research (see Section 4.1). This distinction is made
in many languages (e.g., French, Italian, Spanish, German, Dutch, Greek,
Russian, Norwegian, Swedish, Danish) but not commonly in the English
(Lewin, 1936; Uher, 2021b, 2022b, 2023a).

Frontiers in Psychology

03

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

must place the apples on the weighing scale). The specific quantity
of weight that we denote as ‘1 kg’ is (nowadays) specified through
known reference quantities, which are internationally agreed and
thus, universally interpretable. The apples’ price, by contrast, is
pragmatically quantified for various purposes within a given socioeconomic system that go beyond the apples’ specific physical
properties (e.g., sales, profit). Thus, the price merely indicates
an attributed quantitative value—an attribute—which therefore
changes across contexts and times (e.g., supply, demand and tariffs).
The price’s specific quantitative meaning, in turn, is derived from its
relations to other attributed socio-economic values (e.g., currency,
inflation) and can therefore vary in itself as well.
Psychological ‘measurement’ (e.g., psychometrics) is widely
practised and justified for its pragmatic and utilitarian purposes.
However, it does not involve genuine measurement as often
claimed (therefore here put in inverted commas, as are the
psychological terms ‘scales’ and ‘instruments’2 ). Instead,
psychological ‘measurement’ serves other epistemic purposes
for which statistics is indispensable. Its focus is on analysing
structures in data sets, such as data on persons’ test performances
or responses to rating ‘scales’, in order to derive hypothetical
quantitative relations, such as levels of “person ability” or item
difficulty in Rasch modelling and item response theory. But
the specific ways in which the analysed data—as well as the
performances and responses encoded in these data—are generated
in the first place are still hardly studied (Lundmann and Villadsen,
2016; Rosenbaum and Valsiner, 2011; Toomela, 2008; Uher, 2015c,
2018a,b, 2021a, 2022a, 2023a; Uher and Visalberghi, 2016; Uher
et al., 2013b; Wagoner and Valsiner, 2005).
Indeed, rating ‘scales’, psychology’s most widely-used method
of quantitative data generation, remained largely unchanged since
their invention a century ago (Likert, 1932; Thurstone, 1928). This
is astounding given that rating data form the basis of much of the
empirical evidence used to test scientific hypotheses and theories, to
make decisions about individuals in applied settings (Uher, 2018a,
2022b, 2023a) and to evaluate the effectiveness of interventions and
trainings (Truijens et al., 2019b).
Hence, there is a gap between psychologists’ numerical data and
statistically modelled quantitative results, on the one side, and the
specific entities to be quantified in their actual study phenomena,
on the other. Bridging this gap requires measurement.

results can be interpreted regarding these measurands qualitatively
and quantitatively (epistemic criteria 1 and 2). These two
traceability principles underlie the measurement processes
established in metrology (Uher, 2020b, 2022a).
Metrology, however, is concerned solely with the measurement
of physical properties in non-living nature that feature invariant
relations. Such properties are always related to one another
in the same ways (under specified conditions), such as the
fundamental relations between electric voltage (V), current (I) and
resistance (R). It is this peculiarity that enables their formalisation
in immutable laws (e.g., Ohm’s law) and non-contradictory
mathematical equations (formulas, e.g., V = I ∗ R). Invariant
relations can also be codified in natural constants (e.g., gravity on
Earth, speed of light) and internationally agreed systems of units
(e.g., metric, imperial; JCGM100:2008, 2008). Therefore, physical
laws and formulas, natural constants and international units of
measurement are assumed to be universally applicable.
But precisely because of this peculiarity, metrological
frameworks cannot be applied or translated to psychological
research as directly as metrologists and psychometricians
increasingly propose (e.g., Fisher and Pendrill, 2024; Mari et al.,
2021). This is because psychology’s objects of research feature
peculiarities not known from the non-living ‘world’. These
involve variability, change and novel properties emerging from
complex relations leading to irreversible development as well as
the non-physicality and abstract nature of experience, and others
(Hartmann, 1964; Morin, 1992). Moreover, unlike physical sciences
and metrology, psychology explores not just objects and relations
of specific phenomena (e.g., behaviours) in themselves but also,
and in particular, their individual (subjective) and socio-cultural
(inter-subjective) perception, interpretation, apprehension and
appraisal (Wundt, 1896). These complex study phenomena are
described in multi-referential conceptual systems—constructs.
These conceptual systems cannot be studied with physical
measuring instruments but require language-based methods
instead (Kelly, 1955; Uher, 2022b, 2023b). Language, however,
involves complexities that present unparalleled challenges to
standardised quantitative inquiry, as this article will demonstrate.
To tackle the challenges posed by psychology’s complex study
phenomena and methods of inquiry, metrology provides neither
conceptual nor methodological fundamentals (Uher, 2018a, 2020b,
2022a).
Attempts to directly apply a science’s concepts and theories to
study phenomena not explored by that science involve challenges
that cannot be mastered using the conceptual and methodological
fundamentals of just single disciplines. Such interdisciplinary3
approaches underlie the current attempts to directly apply or
translate metrological concepts to psychological ‘measurement’

1.3 Metrological frameworks of
measurement: Inherent limitations for
psychology
Unlike statistics, measurement concerns how the data are
generated—thus, the ways in which they are empirically connected
both with the unknown quantity to be measured (measurand)
in the study phenomena (data generation traceability) and with
known reference quantities (numerical traceability). Unbroken
documented connection chains determine how the measurement

3

Interdisciplinarity is the synergistic collaboration of several disciplines

who work on a speciﬁc research objective or problem whose solution is
beyond a single discipline’s scope. It is aimed at synthesising and integrating
perspectives, knowledge, theories and concepts, whereby approaches and
methods are transferred between disciplines and integrated through the

2

The terms ‘scales’ and ‘instruments’ are put in inverted commas because

research topic into their disciplinary work. Often, interdisciplinary projects

they do not enable all methodological functions that genuine measuring

beneﬁt just one of the disciplines involved but not the others, or at least not

scales and instruments fulﬁl, as shown in this article and in Uher (2022a).

immediately (Russell, 2022; Uher, 2024).

Frontiers in Psychology

04

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

and psychometrics (e.g., Fisher and Pendrill, 2024; Mari et al.,
2021). But they overlook fundamental ontological, epistemological
and methodological differences. Developing epistemically justified
research frameworks that are applicable across the sciences in
that they are appropriate to the peculiarities of their different
objects of research requires scrutinising the basic presuppositions
of all the sciences involved. Such elaborations are at the core of
transdisciplinarity, which is therefore applied in this article.

introductory overviews, see Uher, 2015b, 2018a, pp. 3-8; Uher,
2021b, pp. 219–222; Uher, 2022b, pp. 3–6). This meta-paradigm
was already applied, amongst others, to explore the epistemological
and methodological fundamentals of data generation methods
(Uher, 2018a, 2019, 2021a) and of theories and practices of
measurement and pragmatic quantification across the sciences
(Uher, 2020b, 2022a) as well as to scrutinise those underlying
psychometrics and quantitative psychology (Uher, 2021c,d, 2022b,
2023a). Pertinent key problems were demonstrated empirically
in multi-method comparisons (e.g., Uher et al., 2013a; Uher and
Visalberghi, 2016; Uher et al., 2013b). The present article builds
upon and substantially extends these previous analyses.

1.4 Transdisciplinarity: A new way of
thinking and scientiﬁc inquiry
Transdisciplinarity has gained recognition as a new way of
thinking about and engaging in scientific inquiry (Montuori,
2008; Nicolescu, 2002, 2008). Unlike all other types of disciplinary
collaboration (e.g., cross-, multi- and inter-4 ), transdisciplinarity
is aimed at analysing complex systems and complex (“wicked”)
real-world problems, at developing an understanding of the ‘world’
in its complexity and at generating unitary intellectual frameworks
beyond specific disciplinary perspectives. To enable such
explorations, transdisciplinarity5 not only relies on disciplinary
paradigms but also transcends and integrates them. It is aimed at
exposing disciplinary boundaries to facilitate the understanding of
implicit assumptions, processes of inquiry and resulting knowledge
as well as to discover hidden connections between different
disciplines and their respective bodies of knowledge. A key focus
is on identifying non-obvious differences, particularly in the
underlying ontology (philosophy and theory of being), epistemology
(philosophy and theory of knowing) and methodology (philosophy
and theory of methods, connecting abstract philosophy of science
with empirical research). That is, transdisciplinarity explores
research questions that can be comprehended only outside of
the boundaries of separate disciplines and therefore challenges
the entire framework of disciplinary thinking and knowledge
organisation (Bernstein, 2015; Gibbs and Beavis, 2020; Piaget,
1972; Pohl, 2011; Uher, 2024).
The present analyses—spanning concepts and approaches from
psychology, social sciences, life sciences, physical sciences and
metrology—rely on the Transdisciplinary Philosophy-of-Science
Paradigm for Research on Individuals (TPS Paradigm;6 for

1.5 Outline of this article
This article offers a novel and ambitious transdisciplinary
approach to advance the epistemological and methodological
fundamentals of quantitative psychology by integrating relevant
concepts from mathematical biophysics, metrology, linguistics,
complexity science, psychology and philosophy of science. It
elaborates the epistemic process structure of measurement,
highlighting crucial differences to statistics (e.g., psychometrics).
A focus is on elaborating the ways in which the peculiarities of

These involve abiotic phenomena (e.g., non-living environment), biotic
phenomena (e.g., physiology, behaviours), psychical phenomena (e.g.,
emotions, thoughts) and socio-cultural phenomena (e.g., culture, language),
which are all merged in the single individual and its functioning and
development but involve different layers of ‘reality’. This poses challenges
for empirical inquiry because different kinds of phenomena require different
ontologies, epistemologies, theories, methodologies and methods, which
are based on different, even contradictory basic presuppositions (Uher,
2024).
To provide conceptual fundamentals that are appropriate to tackle these
challenges and to discover hidden connections between scientiﬁc
disciplines and their knowledges, relevant established concepts from
various sciences have been systematically integrated on the basis of their
basic presuppositions and underlying rationales and complemented by
novel ones. This enabled the development of three unitary frameworks
that coherently build upon each other (therefore, it is termed a ‘paradigm’),
that transcend disciplinary boundaries (therefore termed ‘transdisciplinary’),

4

Coss-disciplinary, multi-disciplinary or inter-disciplinary collaborations

and that are aimed at making explicit the most basic assumptions made

are sometimes erroneously referred to as ‘transdisciplinary’, ignoring the

in a ﬁeld (therefore termed philosophy-of-science). The philosophical

fundamental differences between them (Bernstein, 2015; Uher, 2024).

framework comprises presuppositions for research on individuals (e.g.,

5

complexity, complementarity, anthropogenicity). The metatheoretical

There are two schools of transdisciplinarity. The present analyses build

on theoretical transdisciplinarity. Applied (practical) transdisciplinarity, by

framework

contrast, is aimed less at developing theoretical frameworks and new forms

of various kinds of phenomena studied in individuals, differentiated

of knowledge but more at understanding complex real-world problems and

by their modes of accessibility to humans (e.g., physiology, psyche,

developing tangible solutions. It involves scholars from different disciplines

behaviour, sign systems like language; Uher, 2013, 2015b,c, 2016a,b,

but also political, social and economic actors as well as ordinary citizens with

2023b). It informs the methodological framework, which comprises,

the aim of producing socially robust knowledge rather than merely reliable

amongst others, classiﬁcations of data generation methods based on

scientiﬁc knowledge (Uher, 2024).

the modes of accessibility that they enable; basic principles, concepts

6

The TPS Paradigm is aimed at making explicit the basic presuppositions

and theories of measurement and quantiﬁcation across the sciences

that different disciplines (e.g., biology, medicine, psychology, social sciences,

demonstrated in empirical multi-method comparisons as well as critical

comprises,

amongst

others,

metatheoretical

deﬁnitions

physical sciences) make about research on individuals and their multi-

analyses of the foundations of psychometrics and quantitative psychology:

layered ‘realities’ considering phenomena from all domains of human life.

http://researchonindividuals.org.

Frontiers in Psychology

05

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

language, when used in psychological methods (e.g., rating ‘scales’,
variables and models), obscure the epistemic differences between
them. This confusion contributes to the common yet erroneous
belief that statistics could constitute psychology’s approach for
‘measuring’ its study phenomena. The analyses are made with
regard to psychology but equally apply to pertinent practices in
other sciences.
Section 2 introduces fundamentals of measurement. These
involve the measurement problem—the epistemically necessary
distinction between the object of research and the objects used
as measuring instruments as well as the conceptualisation of how
the latter can provide information on the former. Measurement
also requires the formal representation of observations in sign
systems (e.g., data, formal models). The section presents Rosen’s
system of modelling relations as an abstract general model of the
entire measurement process—from (1) conceptualising the objects
of research, over (2) generating the data, (3) formally manipulating
these data (e.g., statistical analysis) up to (4) interpreting the formal
outcomes obtained with regard to the actual study phenomena.
This process model is shown to underlie metrologists’ approaches
for tackling the problem of circularity in physical measurement,
illustrated in the special cases of measurement coordination
and calibration.
Section 3 applies these fundamentals to explore the challenges
involved in establishing genuine analogues of measurement in
psychology, which arise from the peculiarities of its study
phenomena (e.g., higher-order complexity, non-ergodicity) and
those of the language-based methods required for their exploration
(e.g., inbuilt semantics). It demonstrates that psychology’s focus
on statistical modelling (e.g., psychometrics)—thus, on just one
of the four necessary and interrelated modelling relations in
Rosen’s scheme—ignores the entire measurement process. But
this often goes unnoticed because researchers consider only the
general (dictionary) meanings of their verbal ‘scales’—their inbuilt
semantics, yet ignore how raters actually interpret and use these
‘scales’. This introduces several breaks in the data’s and model’s
relations to the actual phenomena that these are meant to represent.
It also obscures psychology’s measurement problem. This involves
not just the crucial distinction between the phenomena studied
(e.g., feelings) and those used as ‘instruments’ for studying them
(e.g., descriptions of feelings) but also individuals’ (e.g., raters’) local
context-specific interactions with both. These complexify the ways
in which epistemically justified (valid) information about the study
phenomena can be obtained through language-based methods.
Section 4 shows that the frequent failure to distinguish
the study phenomena from the means of their investigation
(e.g., ‘instruments’, formal models) confuses ontological with
epistemological concepts—psychologists’ cardinal error. This
logical error is fuelled by quantitative psychologists’ focus
on statistics as well as by our human tendency to mistake
verbal descriptions for the phenomena described. Many
psychologists therefore mistake judgements of verbal statements
for measurements of the phenomena described. Many also
overlook that statistics can neither establish nor analyse a formal
model’s relations to the real phenomena studied. Establishing these
relations requires genuine analogues of measurement for which the
section elaborates necessary epistemological and methodological
fundamentals. It closes by showing ways in which the powerful

Frontiers in Psychology

artificial intelligence systems (AI) now available for modelling
human language can meaningfully support psychological research
but also perpetuate psychologists’ cardinal error.

2 Key problems of measurement
Measurement, in its most general sense, is a highly selective
form of observation because ‘to measure’ means that we must
choose to measure something without having to measure everything.
Every object of research may feature various non-equivalent
properties (e.g., length, temperature and weight) as well as different
quantitative entities of the same property (e.g., foot length, finger
length and body height). Measurement is a process that involves
the detection and recognition of selected properties in the object
researched and that produces justified information about them
(von Neumann, 1955; Uher, 2022b).
For simplicity, when ‘objects’ are mentioned in the following,
this is always meant to include their properties as well because we
cannot measure objects in themselves (e.g., physical bodies) but
only their specific properties (e.g., mass, voltage and temperature).
Properties are also included when we understand by ‘objects of
research’ not just physical objects (e.g., individuals’ bodies) but also
non-physical phenomena (e.g., individuals’ reasoning, beliefs and
emotions)—thus, denoting the subject matter in general.

2.1 The measurement problem:
Distinguishing the objects of research from
the objects used as measuring instruments
and conceptualising their interaction
We can describe all objects in their existence and being in the
‘world’, thus ontologically. To describe how we can gain knowledge
about a given object, thus epistemologically, we must distinguish
the ontic object (the specific concrete entity) to be measured from
the objects used for epistemic (knowledge-generating) purposes
as measuring instruments. Measurement defines a theory-laden
process structure that conceptualises the objects of research and
the methods (including instruments) used to gain epistemically
justified information about them (von Neumann, 1955).
Specifically, measurement requires an empirical interaction
between the specific quantity to be measured (measurand) in the
study object (e.g., the temperature of a cup of coffee) and the
object used as instrument (e.g., mercury in glass tube). Measuring
instruments must be designed such that they produce, through
their empirical interactions with the measurand, distinctive
indications that are observable for humans. In iterative processes of
theorising and experimentation, scientists identify which variations
of an instrument—when applied in defined ways (the method)—
reliably produce distinct and for humans easily discernible patterns
(e.g., linear extension of mercury in glass tubes). These indications
are used to make inferences on the study object’s specific state at
the moment of interaction to obtain information about it. That is,
scientists use their current state of knowledge to decide how to
design specific objects as instruments, how to use them (methods)
and which indications of their empirical interactions with the

06

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

study object to consider as informative—thus, how ‘to read’ these
indications (Mari et al., 2021; Pattee, 2013; Tal, 2020; Uher, 2020b,
2023a).
In sum, the measurement problem7 concerns the epistemic
distinction of the object of research from the objects used
as measuring instrument. It requires their conceptualisation as
well as that of their presumed empirical interaction under
defined conditions (method) producing observable indications. To
document and analyse them to derive measurement results, the
observed and interpreted indications must be formally represented.

are encoded into data in a study are therefore crucial for
understanding and analysing these data. The specific encoding is
also essential for drawing justified conclusions from the analytical
results about the actual objects explored. The study objects, their
formal representations and the interrelations between both can be
conceptualised and analysed in an overarching model.

2.3 The system of interrelated modelling
relations underlying empirical science
Robert Rosen, a mathematical biophysicist and theoretical
biologist, developed a general relational model to conceptualise the
processes by which living beings selectively perceive specific parts
of their environment and make sense of that information. Scientific
knowledge generation is a special case of these fundamental
processes. Rosen (1985, 1991, 1999) developed this process model
mathematically building on earlier work by Rashevsky (1960b,a)
and using category theory (Lennox, 2024).

2.2 Measurement requires semiotic
representation in rule-based formal models
The relations between physical properties are empirically given,
invariant and lawful (those studied in metrology). But information
about them can be formalised in various ways. Formalisms are
conceptual, mathematical, algorithmic, representational and other
abstract operations that follow logical, deductive or arbitrarily
prescribed rules. In measurement, formal representation involves
sign systems. Signs are composed of tokens (sign carriers; e.g., Latin
or Greek letters, Arabic numerals) that are assigned meanings,
which specify the information that these tokens are meant
to represent (e.g., specific indications observed or quantitative
relations). These sign systems constitute the data and formal
models (e.g., variables, numerical values), which can be used to
analyse the information represented (e.g., mathematically). The
signs’ meanings, however, because they just are assigned (attributed
and ascribed), can vary. Numerals can represent numbers but
also just order (e.g., door ‘numbers’) or just nominal categories
(e.g., genders). That is, formalisation is arbitrary, non-physical and
rule-based (Abel, 2012; Pattee, 2013; Uher, 2023a; von Neumann,
1955).
In sum, semiotic (sign-based) representation is essential for
all empirical sciences (Frigg and Nguyen, 2021; Pattee, 2013;
van Fraassen, 2008). It requires that data and models are clearly
distinguished from the objects that they semiotically represent.
This separation is no philosophical doctrine but an epistemic
necessity that follows from the definition of a sign as something that
stands for something other than itself (Pattee, 2001; Peirce, 1958;
Uher, 2020b, 2022b). The ways in which interpreted observations
7

2.3.1 Category theory: Modelling the relations of
relations between objects
Many psychologists associate mathematics solely with
quantitative analysis (e.g., algebra, arithmetic, calculus). But
mathematics also involves many non-quantitative branches, such
as category theory, combinatorics, geometry, logic, set theory or
topology (Linkov, 2024; Rudolph, 2013), which are also used in
empirical sciences.
Category theory is a general mathematical theory to formally
describe abstract structures and relations. In this theory, a
category is a system of mathematical objects and their relations.
The focus is on conceptualising these relations, understood as
morphisms, arrows or functors, that map a source object to its
target object in specific ways (e.g., through structure-preserving
transformations). Category theory also permits to map these
relations in themselves—thus, to map the relations between
categories, termed natural transformations. Hence, category theory
is about modelling (mathematical) objects, relations of objects as
well as relations of relations (Leinster, 2014). This makes it suitable
to model also the process of scientific modelling in itself (Rosen,
1985).

This is one of the most intricate and also variously deﬁned problems of

2.3.2 Scientiﬁc modelling: Modelling the
relations between causality, encoding, analysis
and decoding

quantum physics. It arose because its micro-physical objects of research
(e.g., electrons) cannot be made accessible to observers other than through
their interactions with macro-physical instruments (e.g., detection screen).

For scientific inquiry in general, Rosen’s system8 of interrelated
modelling relations conceptualises the basic set of processes that
are used to explore a specific part of the ‘world’, conceived as the

This entails challenges called the measurement problem. Simply put,
quantum physicists sought to explain how the macro-physical instruments
can provide information about micro-physical objects, thus what constitutes
a measurement. This required the conceptual distinction between the
object of research and its environment (incl. the instruments and methods

8

of observation)—the Heisenberg cut. It also required explanation of the

model solely as modelling relation. To highlight that it involves the coherent

Rosen himself (Rosen, 1985, 1999) and others refer to this process

processes by which the micro-physical objects under study interact with

modelling of four interrelated modelling relations (arrows 1 to 4) and to

the macro-physical objects used as measuring instruments, which however

pinpoint key distinctions to the statistical modelling of data, which concerns

are debated still today (Atmanspacher, 1997; Hance and Hossenfelder, 2022;

solely arrow 3 in Rosen’s general model, I refer to his process model as a

Heisenberg, 1927; von Neumann, 1955).

system of interrelated modelling relations.

Frontiers in Psychology

07

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

real system under study (object of research, study phenomena).
These processes specify the ways in which this real system being
studied is mapped to the formal system that is used for studying it.
Stated in category-theoretic terms, these modelling relations relate
disjoint categories of objects (Mikulecky, 2000, 2001). In everyday
life, we intuitively establish such modelling relations whenever we
try to make sense of the complex phenomena that we encounter,
grounded in the general belief that these are not completely random
but show some kind of order. Figure 1 illustrates the system of
interrelated modelling relations, comprising the real study system
and the formal system used for studying it as mathematical
objects as well as the processes (mappings, relations) that are
conceptualised within and between them, depicted as arrows. What
do these different processes involve?
In science (and everyday life), when we perceive events
as changes (e.g., in behaviour), we attribute to those changes
some causes that we seek to explain (e.g., mental abilities,
intentions) as possible causes of the observed events (e.g., through
abduction; Peirce, 1958, CP 7.218). This (presumed) causal
relation in the real system (e.g., a person) is depicted as arrow
1. Its exploration requires the encoding of the real changes
observed. That is, selected indications that we deem relevant
for exploring the presumed causal relations are encoded into
objects and relations in the formal study system. These encoding
relations9 —the data generation—are depicted as arrow 2. The
formal system is the explicit scientific model (or, in everyday
life, the intuitive mental model) that we create to deal with the
information obtained from our selected observations. It serves
as a surrogate system that we can explore in ways that are not
possible with the real system itself, such as mathematical analysis
rather than physical dissection. Hence, the model is analysed in

lieu of the actual objects of research (Rosen, 1985, 1991; Uher,
2015b,c,d).
We can manipulate the information encoded in the formal
system in various ways using data modelling techniques (e.g.,
statistical or algorithmic analysis) to try to imitate the causal
events that presumably occur in the real system (e.g., simulation
models). Therefore, we must use our current knowledge of
that real system (e.g., a person), its observable indications (e.g.,
behavioural responses) and (possible) non-observable internal
relations (e.g., mental abilities) to decide which specific operational
manipulations (e.g., statistical analysis) are appropriate to explore
the information about that real system. Through manipulative
changes and operations performed in the formal system—the data
analysis—depicted as arrow 3, we obtain an implication, such as
statistical or simulation results.
Once we believe that our formal system (e.g., structural
equation model) is appropriate and may correspond to the
presumed causal events in the real system, we must relate the results
obtained in the formal system back to the real system studied. This
decoding relation, depicted as arrow 4, requires interpreting the
formal results with regard to the non-formal events occurring in the
real study system. The aim is to check how well the formal model
may represent the causes that we presume and that could explain
the changes observed in that real system. Thus, decoding involves
a mapping relation between disjoint categories of objects—thus,
between the outcomes generated in a formal study system (e.g.,
mathematical) and the outcomes observable in a real study system
(e.g., behavioural).
If the processes of encoding (2), implication (3) and decoding
(4) appears to reproduce the presumed causal processes (1)
sufficiently accurately, the system of modelling relations it said
to commute. Commutation implies that the formal study system
established in this process constitutes a successful model of the
real system studied—expressed in category-theoretic terms by the
equation: 1 = 2 + 3 + 4. Note that these numerals represent not
numbers but different kinds of mapping relations, depicted as the
four arrows in Figure 1. Hence, the system of modelling relations
conceptualises the relations between relations between objects of
different kinds (Rosen, 1985, 1991, 1999).
Rosen’s process model is not commonly taught. Many scientists
are even puzzled when they first encounter it (Mikulecky, 2011).
This is astonishing and unfortunate because it conceptualises how
empirical science, in general, and measurement, in particular,
are done.

2.3.3 How empirical science is done: The
epistemic necessity of making subjective
decisions

FIGURE 1

Rosen’s general process structure of empirical science: A coherent
system of four interrelated modelling relations. The real study
system and the formal system used for studying it, conceptualised
as mathematical objects, as well as the processes (mappings,
relations) each within and back and forth between them, depicted
as arrows. Adapted from Rosen (1985) and Uher (2022b, Figure 6).

9

Rosen’s system of interrelated modelling relations highlights
several key points that are fundamental to empirical inquiry
but often not well considered. First, it specifies that the system
studied and the surrogate system (model) used for studying it
are of different kinds—real vs. formal. The relations (mappings)
established between them—encoding (arrow 2 in Figure 1) and
decoding (arrow 4)—therefore involve transformations that cannot

Also called rules of correspondence (Kaplan, 1964/2017; Margenau,

1950; Torgerson, 1958).

Frontiers in Psychology

08

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

2.4 Tackling the epistemic circularity of
measurement requires a coherent system
of modelling relations

be derived from within either system. These relations are thus
independent of both systems.
Specifically, potentially unlimited amounts of observations that
can be made of a real study system must be mapped onto the limited
sign system that is used as its formal model. Encoding therefore
requires that scientists reduce and simplify their observations to
only those elements that they interpret as relevant for their given
research question and that they choose to encode as data. Thus,
the essence of encoding is high selectivity and reduction. This
requires representational decisions about what to represent, and
what not, and about how to represent it (Harvard and Winsberg,
2022). For example, observations of variable and highly dynamic
phenomena, such as behaviours (e.g., hand gestures), often require
their encoding in fuzzy categories. This involves the mapping
of fuzzy subsets of observations (e.g., physical states of fingers)
into the same formal category (e.g., hand configurations; Allevard
et al., 2005). That is, scientific representation, in general, and
measurement, in particular, involves the selective reductive mapping
of an open domain of a study system to a closed sign system used as
its surrogate model (for general principles, see Uher, 2019).
Decoding—the inverse relation from the formal system back to
the real system (arrow 4)—as well, is a delicate process that is prone
to many potential points of failure. This is because it involves the
transformation of results obtained through formal manipulations
(e.g., mathematical, statistical), which are not possible in the
real system (e.g., behavioural, psychical) itself (Mikulecky, 2000;
Rosen, 1985, 1999). This epistemic necessity makes the modelling
process prone to methodomorphism, whereby methods impose
structures onto the results that, if erroneously attributed to the
study phenomena, may (unintentionally) influence and limit the
concepts and theories developed about them (Danziger, 1985;
Uher, 2022b).
Second, Rosen’s process model highlights that the only part of
our scientific models that—taken by itself—is free from operational
subjectivity is the formal study system (e.g., statistical model)
that is used as a surrogate for the real system studied (arrow 3).
However, the formal model is established by the scientists’ choice
and decisions and is therefore subjective in many ways as well
(Mikulecky, 2000, 2011; Rosen, 1991; Strauch, 1976).

Any method of data generation involves categorisation,
which enables basic forms of analysis, such as grouping
or classifying objects by their similarities and differences.
Measurement has advantages over mere categorisation10 by
enabling more sophisticated analyses of categorised objects
and their relations by additionally enabling the descriptive
differentiation between instances that are of the same kind (quality)
and divisible—thus, that differ in quantity (see Hartmann, 1964;
Uher, 2018a, 2020b).
Key problems of measurement arise from the fact that many
objects of research are not directly observable with our senses
(e.g., electric potential, others’ mental processes) or not accurately
enough (e.g., weight of smaller objects). Rosen’s process model
underlies the approaches that are used to tackle these epistemic
challenges, as illustrated here in the problems of measurement
coordination and calibration.

2.4.1 Measurement coordination: Exploring the
relations between observable indications and
unobservable measurands
Measurement coordination is the specific problem of how to
justify the assumption that a specific measurement procedure does
indeed allow us to measure a specific property in the absence of
independent methods for measuring it. This involves the problem
of how to justify that specific quantity values are assigned to specific
measurands under a specific methodical procedure. Measurement
coordination (also “problem of nomic measurement”; Chang, 2004)
thus concerns the relations between the abstract terms used to
express information about quantities and the ways of measuring
those quantities (Luchetti, 2020).
Challenges arise from many phenomena’s non-observability.
We can often directly observe neither the specific quantity to be
measured (measurand; e.g., a body’s temperature) nor its relation
to the observable quantitative indications that are produced by
its interaction with the measuring instrument (e.g., length of
mercury in glass tubes) and that may be useful to infer the
measurand’s unknown quantity. Thus, in the early stages of
scientific inquiry, the mapping relation between indications and
measurands is unknown (e.g., the function relating the values of
length of mercury with temperature). But it cannot be determined
empirically without already established, independent measurement
methods—because it is through measurement that such relations
are first established. This requires scientists to make preliminary
decisions about what counts as an indication of the property
studied (e.g., temperature)—not knowing their specific relations,
nor (initially) what exactly that property actually is, nor what other
factors may influence an instrument’s observable indications.
The fact that these questions cannot be addressed
independently of each other involves epistemic circularity,

“This makes modelling as much an art as it is a part of
science. Unfortunately, this is probably one of the least well
appreciated aspects of the manner in which science is actually
practised and, therefore, one which is often actively denied”
(Mikulecky, 2000, p. 421).
In sum, Rosen’s general model conceptualises the processes of
empirical science that epistemically justify the representation of
observable regularities by means of abstract (e.g., mathematical)
models. These processes concern the coordination (or
correspondence) between theory and observable phenomena,
such as the applicability of theoretical concepts to concrete
events—known as the problem of coordination (or correspondence)
in science (Hempel, 1952; Margenau, 1950; Torgerson, 1958). To
specify the conditions under which abstract representations can
be applied to observable phenomena and used to investigate—
and also to quantify—entities of non-observable phenomena, it
requires measurement.

Frontiers in Psychology

10

Therefore, mere nominal categorisation should not be confused with

measurement.

09

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

discussed in many sciences and philosophy for a century already
(Chang, 2004; Luchetti, 2024; Mach, 1986; Reichenbach, 1920; van
Fraassen, 2008). To tackle this problem, scientists must establish
appropriate and independent sources of justification for a specific
measurement procedure and the assignment of specific values
to specific quantities of a specific property. To achieve this, they
must coordinate several modelling relations and establish their
interrelations coherently.
To construct thermometers, for example, scientists began with
preliminary definitions that coordinated a preliminary theoretical
concept of temperature with empirical indications that could
be obtained from preliminary instruments and their variations.
They filled various liquids or gases in glass tubes and studied
variations in their extension (volume) obtained from various
heat-producing operations. Presuming a linear invariant relation
between volume and temperature, scientists experimented with
different substances (e.g., alcohol, hydrogen, mercury and water)
to identify under which standardised conditions (e.g., pressure and
heat production) which substance reliably produces distinct (e.g.,
monotonously increasing) indications, thus showing thermometric
properties. From consistent indications produced by different
thermometric substances, scientists could develop different kinds
of thermometers, thus enabling triangulation. The redefinition of
temperature as the average kinetic energy of particles provided a
theoretical foundation to substantiate the linear invariant relation
between temperature and the volume of specific substances
used in thermometers (under specified conditions; Chang, 2004;
JCGM100:2008, 2008; Kellen et al., 2021; Uher, 2020b).
The problem of measurement coordination and its inevitable
epistemic circularity can thus be tackled through iterative processes
in which a coherent system of assumptions is established to
justify specific knowledge claims—using a coherentist approach
(Olsson, 2023). With each epistemic iteration, the theoretical
concept is re-coordinated to more reliable indications, which in
turn enables more precise tests of predictions, more advanced
theories, more refined and more standardised methods and
instruments of measurement, and so on (Luchetti, 2024; Tal,
2020; van Fraassen, 2008). Through these iterative feedback
loops, scientists systematically develop epistemic justifications
for having implemented coordinated connections between the
(presumed) non-observable measurand (e.g., a cup of coffee’s
specific temperature), the observable indications produced by
its lawful (invariant) interaction with the measuring instrument
(e.g., length of mercury), a known reference quantity (e.g.,
another thermometer used for calibration), and the semiotic
representations of the information thus-obtained (e.g., ‘37◦ Celsius’,
‘98.6◦ Fahrenheit’). This information is then mathematically
analysed in the formal system. The obtained result can be used
to make justified inferences on the specific quantity of the nonobservable measurand.
Rosen’s general model allows for conceptualising the process
structure underlying measurement coordination. Accordingly,
this involves modelling the presumed relations within the
real study system, comprising the non-observable object of
research (measurand), the object used as instruments and the
observable indication produced from their (non-observable)
empirical interaction. Their presumed causal relations (arrow
1 in Figure 2) are then explored empirically through unbroken

Frontiers in Psychology

FIGURE 2

Physical measurement: A coherent system of four coordinated and
calibrated modelling relations.

documented traceable relations to, within and back from the
formal system that is used to study that real system (arrows 2, 3
and 4). In iterative feedback loops, the four modelling relations in
Rosen’s system (arrows 1 to 4) are passed through over and over
again, thereby re-coordinating them with one another until their
commutativity is established, indicating successful modelling of the
real study system.
Necessarily, scientists can start to establish measurement
coordination only from preliminary assumptions and theories
about the study property and from preliminary instruments,
methods and decisions on arbitrary encoding rules to obtain
first empirical data. They must use preliminary, yet theoretically
informed, analytical operations to obtain possibly informative
implications. When decoding and interpreting these analytical
results, scientists can also make only preliminary assumptions
about the implications that these may have for the presumed
relations between instrument indications and measurand. Each
iteration in the overarching model of a measurement process
enables new theoretical, methodical and empirical insights and
refinements, which mutually stimulate each other, leading to
cascades of development through which a coherent system of
epistemically justified knowledge claims is established.
These iterative processes also involve testing and adjusting
the specific parameters of a given measurement procedure—
through calibration.

2.4.2 Calibration: Modelling precision and
uncertainty in measurement
Calibration procedures establish reliable relations between the
instrument indications obtained under a given method in the
real study system and the measurement results obtained in the
formal model, which specify information about the actual (nonobservable) quantity to be measured (measurand). Calibration
is theoretically constructed and empirically tested by modelling
uncertainties and systematic errors under idealised theoretical and
statistical assumptions (e.g., about distribution patterns and the

10

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

randomness of influencing factors). The aim is to improve the
accuracy of the measurement results by specifying the ranges of
uncertainties and errors for all parameters involved in a given
measurement procedure. This allows for incorporating corrections
for systematic effects (e.g., of pressure on temperature) and
for adjusting inconsistent observations of instrument indications
(Chang, 2004; Luchetti, 2020; McClimans et al., 2017; Tal, 2017).
That is, calibration involves modelling activities that are aimed
at refining the coordinated structure of a measurement process. In
Rosen’s scheme, this means that the parameters used to establish
proportional (quantitative) relations in the measurement model are
adjusted within and across all four modelling relations (arrows 1
to 4 in Figure 2). These modelling relations are passed through
in iterative feedback loops to obtain quantitative parameter value
ranges that maximise the predictive accuracy of the overarching
model. Thus, calibration refers to the coordination of abstract
quantity terms in the formal model with the specific quantities to
be measured in real study objects when a specific measurement
method (including measuring instrument) is used (Luchetti, 2020;
McClimans et al., 2017).
This model-based view of calibration illustrates the coherentist
approach that is necessary to tackle the epistemic circularity of
measurement. This involves establishing theoretical and empirical
justifications for the assumption that a specific method (including
instrument) enables the measurement of a specific property in
absence of other independent methods for measuring it. Once
different methods (and instruments) for measuring the same
property (e.g., temperature) are developed, uncertainties and
systematic errors can also be modelled across different procedures
and instruments, such as to calibrate thermometers involving
different kinds of thermometric substances (e.g., gases and fluids;
Chang, 2004).
Calibration processes are necessary to implement numerical
traceability11 —thus, to establish for the numerical values
used as measurement results a publicly interpretable meaning
regarding the specific quantities measured (how much of
the studied property that is; Uher, 2022a). To ensure that
measurement results are reliably interpretable and represent
the same quantitative information regarding the measurands
across time and contexts (e.g., specific weight of 1 kilogram),
metrologists defined primary references, which are internationally
accepted (e.g., through legislation) and assumed to be stable
(e.g., prototype kilogramme12 ). From each primary reference,
large networks of unbroken documented connection chains were
established (via national references) to all working references
that are used in measurement procedures in research and
everyday life (e.g., laboratory weighing scales, household
thermometers; JCGM200:2012, 2012). These calibration chains
specify uncertainties and errors as quantitative indications of the

11

quality of a measurement result to assess its precision and accuracy
(JCGM100:2008, 2008; Uher, 2020b).

2.4.3 The theoretical and empirical process
structure of measurement: A coordinated and
calibrated system of four interrelated modelling
relations
The essence of measurement is thus a theory-laden process
structure that involves modelling relations each within a real and
a formal study system as well as back and forth between them,
which are coherently connected with one another in an overarching
process, as conceptualised in Rosen’s general model (Figure 2). This
requires data generation methods that enable empirical interactions
of the non-observable quantities to be measured with a measuring
instrument. Identifying observable indications of these interactions
that are (possibly) informative about these measurands requires a
general model of coherent and epistemically justified interrelations
within and between the real and the formal study system. These are
re-coordinated and re-calibrated with one another by empirically
re-testing the presumed relations (e.g., comparing predicted and
observed indications), re-adjusting their parameters (e.g., errors,
uncertainties) and re-fining assumptions (e.g., randomness).
In sum, a coordinated and calibrated system of interrelated
modelling activities is necessary to empirically implement
unbroken traceable connection chains that establish proportional
(quantitative) relations between the measurement results obtained
in the formal model and both (1) the measurand’s unknown
quantity (data generation traceability) and (2) a known reference
quantity (numerical traceability) in the real study system.
Measurement models thus-developed allow us to derive from
defined observable instrument indications calibrated measurement
results that can be (1) justifiably attributed to the measurands, and
(2) publicly interpreted in their quantitative meaning regarding
those measurands—the two epistemic criteria of measurement
across sciences (Uher, 2020b, 2022a). The insights gained from
iteratively developing the process structure of a measurement
model may also necessitate a revision of the definitions and
theoretical explanations of the objects and relations in the
real system (e.g., temperature redefined as average kinetic
particle energy).
Clearly, physical measurement procedures cannot be directly
applied to psychology. But what specifically are the challenges for
devising analogous processes in psychology?

3 Psychology’s inherent challenges
for quantitative research
The history of metrology testifies to the challenges involved
in tackling the problems of measurement coordination and
calibration in physical measurement (Chang, 2004)—thus, in
the study of invariant relations in non-living nature, which can
therefore be formalised in immutable laws, natural constants and
mathematical formulas. Psychology, however, explores phenomena
(e.g., behaviours, thoughts and beliefs) that are—in themselves—
variable, context-dependent, changing and developing over time
(Uher, 2021b). Such peculiarities are characteristic of living systems

Numerical traceability is the transdisciplinary term to denote—on more

abstract levels of consideration—the basic principle underlying the concept
of metrological traceability used in physical measurement (JCGM200:2012,
2012) in order to adapt it to the peculiarities of non-physical research.
12

The standard unit of one kilogram, originally speciﬁed through artefacts,

was recently deﬁned in terms of natural constants using the Planck constant,
speed of light and the Caesium atom’s resonant frequency (BIPM, 2019).

Frontiers in Psychology

11

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

(e.g., psyche and society) and not studied in metrology. These
peculiarities entail that the low replicability of psychological
findings is not just an epistemic problem that could be remedied
with more transparent and robust methods, as many currently
believe. Rather, it is also a reflection of the indeterminate variability
and changeability of the study phenomena themselves (arrow
1 in Figure 1). Low replicability of psychological findings thus
reflects not just epistemic uncertainty of ‘measurement’ but also
fundamental ontic indetermination (Scholz, 2024).

Rogosch, 1996; Mason, 2010; Richters, 2021; Sato et al., 2009;
Toomela, 2008; Uher, 2022b). To consider multiple processes
and outcomes at once, we must conceptualise many–to–many
relations between the parts and their whole on different levels
of organisation.
This entails that specific relations from observable indications
to non-observable phenomena that apply to all individuals in all
contexts and all times cannot be identified. This complicates the
possibilities for solving the problem of measurement coordination
in psychology. Specifically, complex relations challenge the
appropriateness of the sample-level statistics commonly used in
psychology, which are aimed at identifying invariant13 (e.g., cause–
effect) relations, such as between latent and manifest variables in
factor analyses or structural equation models—that is, one–to–
one relations.
Complex multi-level relations also entail the fact that the
properties of parts identified in isolation (e.g., cells) cannot explain
the whole (e.g., organism) because its properties emerge only from
the parts’ joint interactions. Changes in single parts or single
relations between them can change the properties of the whole.
Psychical processes cannot even be isolated from one another,
although they can be qualitatively distinguished (Luria, 1966).
Thus, complex wholes are more than and different from the sum of
their parts (Morin, 1992, 2008; Nowotny, 2005; Ramage and Shipp,
2020; Uher, 2024). All this entails that living systems cannot be
explored by reducing them to the parts of which they are composed
(e.g., organisms to cells), as this is possible for the non-living
systems (e.g., technical) featuring invariant relations as studied in
metrology (Rosen, 1985, 1991).

3.1 Psychology’s study phenomena:
Peculiarities of higher-order complexity
Living systems (e.g., biotic, psychical and social) are of higher
order complexity. They feature peculiarities not known from nonliving systems (Baianu and Poli, 2011; Morin, 2008).

3.1.1 Emergent properties not present in the
processes from which they arise
In higher-order (super) complex systems, interactions occur
between various kinds of processes on different levels of
organisation from which novel properties emerge on the level of
their whole that are not present in the single processes from which
they arise. These novel, higher-level properties can also feed back to
and change the lower-level processes from which they emerge. Such
dynamic multi-level feedback loops lead to continuous change and
irreversible development on all levels of organisation (Morin, 1992;
Rosen, 1970, 1999).
Human languages, for example, gradually emerged from
individuals’ interactions with one another. The language of a
community, in turn, mediates and shapes the ways in which its
single individuals perceive, think and organise their experiences
into abstract categories. Through dynamic multi-level feedback
processes over time, individuals, their community and their
language mutually influence each other, thereby developing
continuously further and getting ever more complex (Boroditsky,
2018; Deutscher, 2006; Valsiner, 2007; Vygotsky, 1962). This
entanglement of mind and language first enables the use of
language-based methods in science. But the intricacies of language
also promote conceptual confusions, which are still largely
overlooked, as this section will show.
Emergence also entails complex relations between the levels of
parts and wholes.

3.1.3 Humans are thinking intentional agents
who make sense of their ‘world’
Psychologists also cannot ignore the fact that humans
are thinking agents who have aims, goals and values that
they pursue with intention and who can anticipate (mentally
model) future outcomes and proactively adjust their actions
accordingly. Humans hold personal (subjective) and sociocultural views on their ‘world’, including on the psychological
studies in which they partake. Individuals memorise and learn.
Therefore, simple repetitions of identical study conditions (e.g.,
experiments and items) cannot be used (Danziger, 1990; Kelly,
1955; Shweder, 1977; Smedslund, 2016a; Uher, 2015a; Valsiner,
1998).
In sum, psychology’s study phenomena feature peculiarities
that do not occur in the properties amenable to physical
measurement. These peculiarities complicate the design of
analogous research processes that meet the two epistemic criteria
of measurement. In the following, we explore these complications
stepwise, starting with the level of data analyses.

3.1.2 Complex wholes and their parts:
One–to–many, many–to–one and
many–to–many relations
In living systems (e.g., individuals), the same process (e.g., a
specific feeling) can generate different outcomes (e.g., different
behaviours) in different times, contexts or individuals—thus,
involving one–to–many relations (multifinality, pluripotency). Vice
versa, different processes (e.g., of abstract thinking) can generate
the same outcome (e.g., solving the same task)—thus, involving
many–to–one relations (equifinality, degeneracy; Cicchetti and

Frontiers in Psychology

13

Invariance here refers to what kinds of objects are always related to

one another (one–to–one rather than e.g., one–to–many), not how. Their
speciﬁc relations may have quantitatively different forms (e.g., linear, nonlinear).

12

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

3.2 Psychology’s focus on aggregate level
analysis

between-individual (synchronic) variations are uninformative
about within-individual (diachronic) variations. Thus, when using
sample-level analyses (e.g., factor analysis) to study individual-level
phenomena (e.g., psychical ‘mechanisms’), psychologists commit
an inferential error—the ergodic fallacy (Bergman and Trost, 2006;
Danziger, 1990; Lamiell, 2018, 2019; Molenaar and Campbell,
2009; Richters, 2021; Smedslund, 2016a, 2021; Speelman and
McGann, 2020; Uher, 2022b, 2015d; Valsiner, 2014b; van Geert,
2011; von Eye and Bogat, 2006).
In sum, the higher-order complexity of psychology’s study
phenomena poses considerable challenges for empirical research.
The uncontrollability of influencing factors requires statistical
analyses of large samples. But individuals’ complexity renders
sample-level results uninformative about the single individual.
These and further problems complicate the development of
genuine analogues of measurement.

Psychology’s primary scientific focus (unlike sociology’s) is on
the individual, which constitutes its theoretical unit of analysis. The
empirical units of analysis in psychological ‘measurement’, however,
are groups. Why is that so? And what justifies the assumption that
results obtained on aggregate levels are suited to quantify individual
level phenomena?

3.2.1 Indeﬁnitely complex and uncontrollable
inﬂuence factors: Randomisation and large
sample analyses
Unlike metrologists and physical scientists, psychologists
cannot isolate their study objects and experimentally manipulate
the (presumed) quantities to be measured in them, such
as individuals’ processing speed, reasoning abilities or beliefs
(Trendler, 2009). Moreover, in physical measurement, influencing
factors involve comparably few and exclusively here-and-now
factors. By contrast, the factors influencing psychology’s study
phenomena, such as internal and external conditions causing
mental distraction, are indefinitely complex and ever-changing
and can even transcend the here-and-now (Barrett et al., 2010;
Smedslund et al., 2022; Uher, 2016a).
To deal with these challenges, psychologists study groups of
individuals that are assumed to be sampled randomly with regard
to these unspecifiable and uncontrollable influence factors. To
estimate the impact of these factors, psychologists analyse samples
that are large enough to allow for identifying regularities beyond
pure randomness in the study phenomena (e.g., by comparing
experimental with control groups). This approach necessitates
the statistical analysis of group-level distribution patterns. The
statistical results, however, are commonly interpreted with regard
to the single individuals (e.g., their beliefs). That is, from statistical
analysis to result interpretation, psychologists shift their unit of
analysis from the sample back again to the individual—without
explanation but in line with their theoretical unit of analysis
(Danziger, 1985; Richters, 2021; Uher, 2022b).
But in what ways can results on aggregates be informative about
single individuals?

3.3 Psychological ‘measurement’ theories:
Failure to conceptualise a coherent system
of interrelated modelling relations
As Section 2 showed, measurement requires a coherent system
of four interrelated modelling relations—each within a real and
a formal study system and back and forth between them (arrows
1 to 4 in Figure 2). The ‘measurement’ theories established
in psychology, however, such as Representational Theory of
Measurement (RTM) and psychometrics, focus on just some of
these modelling relations, thereby ignoring the overall model that
is necessary to relate them coherently to one another.

3.3.1 Representational Theory of Measurement:
Simple observable relations represented in
mathematical relations
Representational Theory of Measurement (RTM; Krantz
et al., 1971; Luce et al., 1990; Suppes et al., 1989) formalises
axiomatic conditions by which observable relational structures
can be mapped onto symbolic relational structures. It provides
mathematical theories for this mapping (representation theorem),
including permissible operations for transforming the symbolic
structures without breaking their mapping relations onto
the observable structures (uniqueness theorem; Narens, 2002;
Vessonen, 2017). That is, representational theory specifies the
semiotic representation of observable indications—the encoding
and decoding relations in Rosen’s structural model. The theory’s
focus on isomorphisms—thus, on reversible one–to–one relations
between observables and data (arrows 2 and 4 in Figure 2)—
presupposes that the objects of research feature properties with
quantitative relations that are directly observable (e.g., ‘greater than’
or ‘less than’). Such relations can be mapped straightforwardly
onto a symbolic system that preserves these relations (e.g., ordinal
variables; Suppes and Zinnes, 1963).
Psychologists, however, encounter tremendous challenges
when trying to identify empirical regularities in observable
(presumed) indications of psychical phenomena as well as
(possibly) quantitative relations in these indications (e.g., in

3.2.2 The ergodic fallacy: Psychology’s common
sample–to–individual inferences built on
mathematical errors
Statistical analyses of aggregated data sets can reveal
information about the single cases only when their synchronic and
diachronic variations are equal (isomorphic)—a property of some
stochastic and dynamic processes in non-living systems termed
ergodicity. In the 1930s already, mathematical-statistical (ergodic)
theorems14 were used to prove that ergodicity does not hold
for cases that vary, change and develop (Birkhoff, 1931). Hence,
psychology’s study phenomena are non-ergodic, which means that
14

The theorems were ﬁrst derived in ergodic theory, a branch of

mathematics originating in statistical physics.

Frontiers in Psychology

13

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

behaviours, performances). Highly variable dynamic study
phenomena necessitate fuzzy encoding relations, which can be
defined and established differently. Specifying such many–to–one
encoding relations is seldom straightforward. It requires theorydriven (in parts also arbitrary) decisions of what to formally
represent and how. These decisions may impact the information
encoded in the data—and thus, the results that can be obtained
from them (Uher, 2019). All this further complicates the problem
of measurement coordination in psychology (Luchetti, 2024;
Uher, 2022b, 2023a). In all sciences, measurement requires highly
selective and reductive representation. In psychology, it requires
mapping information about a highly complex study system, which
cannot be fully defined in principle (e.g., behavioural, psychical
and belief systems), to a simple system, which can be fully defined
(e.g., structural equation model).
Representational theory, however, provides neither concepts
nor procedures for how and why some observations should
be mapped to a symbolic relational system (Mari et al., 2017;
Schwager, 1991). Concretely, it provides no concepts to specify the
relations between observables and the (non-observable) quantity to
be measured (measurand) in a study object. Nor does it provide
concepts to specify the measurand’s empirical interactions with
the measuring instrument that first produce these observable
indications (arrow 1 in Figure 2). Such specifications, however,
are necessary to design suitable instruments and to operate
them in defined empirical procedures (methods). They are also
necessary to justify why some indications, but not others, should
be observed—thus, to generate data that can be informative about
the measurands (arrow 2). In view of this, it is unsurprising
that representational theory provides no concepts for controlling
the effects of influence properties and for modelling precision
and uncertainty either. The theory confines empirical research
to just simple observables that can be mapped easily onto
useful mathematical relations, and vice versa. As Rosen (1985)
highlighted, however, encoding and decoding (arrows 2 and 4)
relations involve transformations that cannot be derived from
within either system and that are therefore independent of
these systems.
In sum, representational theory ignores the entire system
of traceable modelling relations that must be coordinated and
calibrated with one another to enable epistemically justified
and publicly interpretable inferences from defined observable
indications to the (non-observable) quantity of interest—the
key criteria of measurement (Figure 2). Instead, it stipulates
a purely representationalist and operationalist procedure that
simplifies observations such as to align them to mathematically
useful relations—in line with Stevens (1946, p. 667) earlier
redefinition of ‘measurement’ as “the assignment of numerals to
objects according to a rule” (other than randomness; Stevens,
1957). These simplistic notions formed the basis for psychology’s
theories and practices of pragmatic quantification and separated
them from those of measurement used in metrology and
physics (Mari et al., 2021; McGrane, 2015; Uher, 2021c).
Still today, these representationalist and operationalist notions
of ‘measurement’ underlie the psychology’s main method of
quantitative data generation—rating ‘scales’, in which numerical
scores are straightforwardly assigned to specific answer categories.

Frontiers in Psychology

These representationalist and operationalist notions of
‘measurement’ also underlie psychometrics—meant to mean the
“science of measuring the mind” (Borsboom, 2005).

3.3.2 Psychometrics: Formal modelling aligned
to statistical criteria and theories, enabling
pragmatic result-dependent data generation
The triviality of the isomorphic relations in encoding
and decoding (arrows 2 and 4 in Figure 3)—stipulated by
representational theory and Steven’s redefinition of ‘measurement’
and implemented in rating methods—shifted psychologists’ focus
away from the real study system (arrow 1) to the formal
model (arrow 3). Statistical theories and methods, such as
those of psychometrics, were advanced to develop sophisticated
models and analyses that enable the reliable and purposeful
discrimination between cases (e.g., individuals). This involved
designing psychometric ‘instruments’ that allow for generating
data with useful statistical properties (e.g., normal distribution,
high item discrimination). Stevens’ (1946) mathematically defined
‘scales’ (e.g., ordinal, interval, ratio)—although these are neither
exhaustive nor universally accepted (Thomas, 2019; Uher, 2022a;
Velleman and Wilkinson, 1993)—contributed further concepts to
this end.
Psychometrics serves its pragmatic and utilitarian purposes
well. But its approaches align the formal system (arrow 2 in
Figure 3) to the criteria and theories on which the formal model
and its manipulations are built (e.g., item-response theory)—
regardless of the specific phenomena studied (e.g., behaviours
and beliefs). Indeed, some even consider representation to be
irrelevant for psychological ‘measurement’ (e.g., Borsboom and
Mellenbergh, 2004; Michell, 1999). The epistemic necessity to
conceptualise and implement an empirical interaction with the
(non-observable) quantity to be measured in individuals gets out
of sight. Psychometricians also overlook that identifying observable
indications of these empirical interactions that may be informative
about the measurands requires theoretical knowledge about both
the real system studied and the methodical system (including
the ‘measuring instruments’) used to study it (arrow 1). Instead,
psychometricians choose ‘instrument’ indications (e.g., answer
categories on rating ‘scales’) onto which pragmatically useful data
structures (e.g., fixed numerical value ranges) can be mapped
straightforwardly (Uher, 2018a, 2022a,b).
Hence, by focusing on statistical modelling (arrow 3, Figure 3),
psychometricians neglect the three other modelling relations
(arrows 1, 2 and 4) without which a formal system cannot
be coordinated and calibrated with the real study system.
Their interrelations are neither conceptualised nor empirically
established but simply decreed, such as in the operationalist
definition of ‘intelligence’ as what an IQ-test measures (Boring,
1923; van der Maas et al., 2014). Specifically, psychometricians
fail to conceptualise the real study system—comprising the
study object, the measurand, the instrument and their empirical
interaction producing observable indications. Therefore, they
overlook that the quantitative scores recorded in ‘intelligence test’
(e.g., number of correct answers) are properties of the outcomes of
intellectual abilities but not of these abilities themselves.

14

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

FIGURE 3

Psychometrics: Result-dependent methods of data generation and data analysis. Adapted from Uher (2022b, Figure 9).

These inconsistencies reflect the confusion between two
incompatible epistemological frameworks, which is intrinsic
to psychometrics. Psychometricians’ declared aims and result
interpretations invoke the realist framework of measurement.
But psychometric theories and the implemented empirical
practices are built on a pragmatist utilitarian framework.
These pragmatic fundamentals are reflected, however, in
validity concepts that focus on the results’ practical use, such
as their social and ethical consequences (Messick, 1995), or
the inferences and actions that can be derived from them,
such as regarding their plausibility and appropriateness
(Kane, 2013; Uher, 2021d,c).
In sum, psychometricians focus on the formal model and its
analyses (arrow 3) but neglect conceptualising and empirically
implementing its interrelations with the real study system (arrows
1, 2 and 4). This aligns psychometric methods (e.g., ‘scales’)
to statistical theories rather than to the study phenomena,
thus enabling not traceable but result-dependent data generation
(Figure 3) and leading to methodomorphism (Uher, 2020b,
2021c,d, 2022b, 2023a). This focus on statistical modelling abstracts
away from the processes of measurement and thus, the actual study
phenomena. It also obscures the data’s meaning.

Indeed, any test performance may involve several, qualitatively
different intellectual abilities and modes of processing (e.g.,
symbolic, situational and verbal). More intelligent individuals
may use qualitatively different (e.g., more efficient) abilities than
less intelligent ones, different modes of processing and even
multiple ones dynamically, leading to quantitatively different
test performances. But none of these intricate many–to–one,
one–to–many and many–to–many relations are considered in
psychometrics. It only models relations of specific test outcomes to
the abstract ‘intelligence’ construct that they operationally define,
which is then re-interpreted as a real unitary object to be ‘measured’
(Khatin-Zadeh et al., 2025; Toomela, 2008; Uher, 2020b, 2021d,c,
2022b).
Psychometrics also provides neither concepts nor procedures
for establishing unbroken traceable connections between
results, measurands and instruments. As Section 2 showed,
these are necessary to address the problems of circularity
and coordination—thus, to provide evidence that a specific
measurement procedure does indeed allow us to measure a
specific property. Still, psychometric validity is often defined
as “a property of measurement instruments that codes whether
these instruments are sensitive to variation in a target attribute.”
This is “broadly consistent with the view that a test is valid if
it measures what it should measure” (Borsboom et al., 2009,
p. 135). Such causal measurand–result relations, however, are
neither conceptualised nor empirically implemented. Therefore,
the validity of psychometric ‘instruments’ can be analysed only
regarding the coherence of their results with those obtained
with other psychometric ‘instruments’ that are targeted at
study phenomena that are considered to be theoretically related
(Cronbach and Meehl, 1955).

Frontiers in Psychology

3.4 Psychology’s focus on statistical
modelling obscures the data’s meaning
Psychologists’ focus on statistics obscures the two distinct
meanings that must always be conceptualised for empirical
data—and thus, what these data actually represent. This highlights

15

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

peculiarities of sign systems that are crucial for enabling
empirical science.

‘2’ and ‘3’. Thus, syntactically, these data may denote categorical
(qualitative) differences, order relations or quantitative relations in
a model. The empirically established semantic meaning, in turn,
anchors the data in that selected part of ‘reality’ that they are meant
to represent and for which they serve as a surrogate to enable formal
analyses (arrow 2). Thus, semantically, the same numerical data ‘1’,
‘2’ and ‘3’ may refer, in different variables, to individuals’ genders,
shoe sizes, finger rings or hand gestures.
Statistics and other algorithms operate solely on the basis of
a model’s syntactic relations (arrow 3). They can neither establish
nor analyse a model’s relations to a real study system (e.g., genders,
shoes or gestures). These methods perform purely syntactic data
analyses no matter what these data stand for in a study—thus,
regardless of their semantic relations to the real study system
(arrows 2 and 4 in Figure 5). Ignoring the data’s empirical semantics
can lead to confusion about the syntactic relations that should be
assigned to them (arrow 3) to appropriately match the empirical
syntax of the real system (arrow 1).

3.4.1 Statistics and algorithms: Analysing the
syntax of data irrespective of their meaning with
regard to the study phenomena—their empirical
semantics
Statistics and other algorithms (e.g., data mining, machine
learning) are formal methods that enable manipulations of formal
models (arrow 3 in Figure 1), such as to identify regularities,
interdependences, compatibilities or network structures in data
sets. Statistical and algorithmic methods allow us to study how
the data (e.g., variables, values) in a formal model are related to
one another—their syntax. In linguistics, syntax denotes the set
of language rules (e.g., grammar) that specify the structure and
ordering in which words and phrases can be combined linearly to
form sentences, which may influence their function in a sentence.
Syntax allows us to indicate, for example, who is the actor of
an activity and who the recipient. The words’ meaning, in turn,
arises from what they stand for and represent—their semantics.
In linguistics, semantics denotes the set of rules that specify the
meaning that words, phrases and sentences conventionally convey
with regard to what they refer to (their referents). Thus, semantic
meaning is established by way of a formal relation (Michaelis, 2003;
Pattee, 2001).
The distinction between syntax and semantics is universal and
basic to all life. In biophysics and biosemiotics, the DNA’s syntax
denotes the physical linear sequence of base pairs (copied into
RNA through transcription15 ), whereas its semantics denotes the
meaning that specific triplets on that sequence (codons) have for
cells to instruct the production of specific amino acids (translation).
That is, base triplets (codons) serve as physical tokens and carriers
(“sign vehicles”) that stand for something else (amino acids). What
specifically they stand for is determined not physically (not by their
molecular structure) but formally—on the basis of rules (described
in the codon table; Abel, 2009, 2012; Pattee, 2021).
This illustrates the three distinct parts from which a sign
emerges a whole (Figure 4). The signifier (e.g., a written word, an
RNA codon) is the physical carrier that stands for something other
than itself, which it represents, signifies or refers to—its referent
(e.g., object, amino acid). The signifier’s formal relation to a specific
referent defines its semantic meaning (Ogden and Richards, 1923;
Peirce, 1958; Rød, 2004; Uher, 2021c, 2022b; Vygotsky, 1962).
Hence, for empirical studies, we must always assign both a
syntactic and a semantic meaning to the signifiers that we use as
data (e.g., variable names, numerical values). The syntactic meaning
defines the data’s relations within the formal system (Figure 5).
Nominal, ordinal and ratio variable meanings, for example, define
different mathematical relations for the same numerical values ‘1’,

15

3.4.2 Ignoring the data’s empirically established
semantics can lead to inappropriate syntactic
(statistical) analyses
The data’s semantic meaning is empirically established through
encoding, which requires decisions about how to select and convert
observations of elements of the real system into elements of the
formal system (arrow 2 in Figure 5). To enable formal analyses,
these conversion decisions must also consider syntactic relations
that are identifiable in the selected indications of the real study
system (arrow 1) and relevant to the research question (Uher,
2019). Qualitative differences (e.g., gender), rank-order differences
(e.g., shoe sizes) or countable quantitative differences (e.g., finger
rings) may be straightforwardly encoded into nominal, ordinal and
ratio variables using isomorphic mapping relations as stipulated in
representational theory. Mostly, however, psychologists encounter
highly variable dynamic observables, such as in verbal and nonverbal behaviours (e.g., speech, gestures), that may be best described

Transcription is the process whereby DNA is copied into RNA, following

lawful (inevitable, necessary) pairings between bases (e.g., cytosine with
guanine) determined by their molecular structure. Translation, by contrast,
FIGURE 4

is the process whereby speciﬁc RNA codons instruct the synthesis of speciﬁc

Signs: The meaning assigned to a signiﬁer establishes its semantic
relation to a referent. Adapted from Uher (2018a, Figure 3).

proteins following rules, which are not inevitable and not necessary given the
bases’ molecular structure but arbitrary—they could also be otherwise.

Frontiers in Psychology

16

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

(e.g., order, interval). This ignores the empirical semantics that
the researchers themselves establish by making these assignments.
Specifically, what justifies the assumption that “agree” (encoded as
‘4’) reflects more than “disagree” (encoded as ‘2’)? How can we
assume that “neither disagree, nor agree” (encoded as ‘3’)—thus,
having no opinion or finding the item not applicable—constitutes
more than “strongly disagree” (encoded as ‘1’)? Given the verbal
answer categories’ logico-semantic meanings, it is no wonder that
raters interpret these not as reflecting order or interval relations but
only as categorically—thus, qualitatively (nominally)—different
(Uher, 2018a, 2022a, 2023a).
In sum, data always have, at once, semantic and syntactic
relations. Their semantic relations are established through
coordinated empirical relations to the study phenomena. These
determine which syntactic relations can be assigned to the data to
appropriately represent those identifiable in the real system, thus
also enabling their calibration.
Establishing the data’s empirical semantics is complexified by
human language. Its peculiarities first enable the use of languagebased methods in empirical research, but they also obscure
psychology’s measurement problem.

FIGURE 5

Data in formal models: Semantic and syntactic meanings.

in sets of fuzzy observables in which syntactic structures cannot be
straightforwardly identified.
Necessarily, the syntactic relations assigned to the formal model
(arrow 3 in Figure 5) are also informed by the formal manipulations
that they enable (e.g., statistical analysis). But because the model is
just a surrogate, its syntactic relations must be aligned to those that
are identifiable in the observables of the real study system (arrow
1). This is crucial because observations constitute the only direct
empirical evidence that can be obtained about the real study system.
Observational raw data form the basis for modelling, in the formal
system, the (presumed) non-observable relations in the real study
system (for which different syntactic relations may be conceived)
as well as for testing the model’s appropriateness through
coordination and calibration. Importantly, which observable
indications and which of their syntactic relations are (possibly)
informative about the non-observable measurands depends not
on the indications’ ease of observability but on the theories about
the objects of research, the measurands, instruments and their
empirical interactions. Selecting indications by desirable syntactic
structures, as done in psychometric ‘instrument’ design and
stipulated by representational theory, leads to methodomorphism,
result-dependent data generation—and eventually to biased
‘measurement’ results.
Hence, whether a model’s syntax and the statistical analyses
performed on it (arrow 3 in Figure 5) are appropriate for, and
thus informative about, the empirical syntactic relations in the
real study system (arrow 1) depends on the model’s empirically
established relations to that real system (arrows 2 and 4). Ignoring
the model’s empirical semantic relations, such as by neglecting
encoding, coordination and calibration, can lead to logical errors
and inappropriate data analysis. For example, students sometimes
analyse means and standard deviations for data on persons’ gender
(encoded, e.g., as ‘1’, ‘0’ or ‘1’, ‘2’, ‘3’) by taking them for ratio
rather than nominal values. Thus, they ignore their empirical
semantics of their data, established during data generation, and
assign a different syntax to them. Syntactic mismatches between
real and formal system also occur when researchers encode the
verbal answer values of Likert ‘scales’ (‘instrument’ indications) in
numerical scores and assign to them desired syntactic relations
Frontiers in Psychology

3.5 Natural language: Intuitive and ease of
use obscures inherent complexities and
common confusions
Language is an essential means for psychological research
because psychical phenomena (e.g., thoughts and beliefs) are
accessible only by the individual itself, and they can be accessed
in others (e.g., research participants) only through language
(Uher, 2016a; Valsiner, 2007; Vygotsky, 1962). In everyday
life, we use language to exchange with others intuitively and
without much reflection. Yet, this ease of use often leads us
to overlook unparalleled complexities that challenge empirical
research, especially measurement.

3.5.1 Language and mind: Different yet
inseparable systems
Language, as we have seen, is a complex sign system. It involves
physical carriers (signifiers; e.g., spoken or written words) that
stand for and refer to something else (referents), which establishes
their semantic meanings. The rules underlying the semantics
and syntax (e.g., grammar) of language are construals of human
minds. This also applies to pragmatics, the rules specifying the
language’s function in the context of social interaction (e.g., the
communicating persons’ intentions and beliefs). These rules enable
competent language users to express complex meanings with some
flexibility and in context-dependent ways as well as to infer the
specific meaning that others may want to express verbally in a given
context. The language rules established in a community feed back
to the individuals who develop and use them by mediating and
shaping both their intra-individual and inter-individual processes
(e.g., feeling, thinking, memorising, interacting and negotiating) as
well as the social institutions aimed at regulating these processes
(e.g., family and government). Therefore, language and psyche are
inseparable from one another while still constituting different kinds
17

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

of phenomena (Peirce, 1958; Uher, 2015b,a, 2016a, 2018a; Valsiner,
2000, 2014a; Vygotsky, 1962).
We use our maternal language effortlessly and without being
fully aware of its inbuilt semantics, syntax and pragmatics. This
is because these complex rules form an inherent part of our
psychical systems after we internalised them as children during
our language socialisation. Therefore, as native speakers, we often
struggle to explicate the rules that we intuitively use, and we are
often surprised what rules foreign learners of our language can
state. That is, we are competent without comprehension (Arnulf,
2020; Dennett, 2012). This entails that we rarely become aware of
the inherently representational nature of language, which is built
into its semantics. Indeed, in our minds, we do not perceive our
words just as tokens of the objects to which they refer but as
these objects themselves. This illusion makes language so highly
functional in everyday life. Yet, it becomes apparent again in our
struggles of learning a foreign language when we have to acquire
new words as arbitrary tokens to refer to the things of the ‘world’.
But once we have internalised (at last parts of) a given language’s
inbuilt semantics, we cannot easily blank it out anymore to enable
reflection and reflexivity about the ways in which it modulates and
shapes our thinking. This is what makes naming a word’s font
colour more difficult when that word itself denotes another colour
(Stroop effect)—unless we do not know the language, then the task
is easy.
Therefore, we often forget that semantic relations are just in our
minds, linking our words and thoughts seamlessly with the objects
to which they refer. As Alan Watts stated:

the actual ‘reality’ of it. Specifically, a map of a city is not that
city in itself. Reading a map is not the same as walking the streets.
Maps depict in abstract symbolic ways only those parts of a territory
that are seen as relevant for some purpose (encoding, arrow 2
in Figure 1). Therefore, we can establish for the same territory
different maps (e.g., road maps, geographical or political maps).
That is, maps are reduced semiotic representations. All maps are
limited. They may be incomplete or outdated. ‘Reality’ may change
(e.g., closed roads). Moreover, using maps requires interpretation
(decoding, arrow 4), which may involve errors. Therefore, our maps
of some ‘reality’ (arrow 3) neither are that ‘reality’ in itself (arrow
1) nor can they exactly match that ‘reality’ (arrows 2 and 4).
Korzybski (1933) highlighted that we tend to mistake our
conceptual models of ‘reality’ for that ‘reality’ in itself. This occurs
when we ignore that the word is not the thing, the abstraction of
something is not that something in itself —and thus, also, that the
theory is not what it describes and that the data are not the study
phenomena for which they stand (Uher, 2018a, 2021a, 2022b). As
Alan Watts put it more vividly,
“symbols bear the same relation to the real world that
money bears to wealth. You cannot quench anybody’s thirst
with the word ‘water’ just as you cannot eat a dollar bill and
derive nutrition.” “Money simply represents wealth in rather
the same way that the menu represents the dinner16 ” (Watts
and Watts, 1996).
Korzybski warned of the logical fallacies that ensue when the
model is mistaken for ‘reality’. These occur not just in everyday
life but also in science. In psychology, for example, latent variables
that were statistically derived in a formal (e.g., factor analytical)
model (arrow 3 in Figure 3) are often interpreted as ‘traits’, ‘psychophysical mechanisms’ or ‘personality factors’ that causally underlie
individuals’ behaviours, thoughts and feelings (arrow 1; Uher, 2013,
2018b, 2022b). In psychological jargon, the term ‘data’ is often used
to denote both the study phenomena (e.g., in individuals) and the
formally encoded information about them (e.g., on spreadsheet;
Uher, 2021a). The term ‘variables’, as well, often denotes not
just parts of formal models but also the modelled real objects
themselves (Danziger and Dzinas, 1997; Maraun and Gabriel,
2013; Maraun and Halpin, 2008; Uher, 2021d,c). The confusion
of the model with ‘reality’ is also reflected in the notions that
we would study ‘correlated behaviours’ or ‘measure variables’ as
well as in the demand to grant “a serious ontological status to
variables” (Borsboom, 2008, p. 41). Conflated jargon promotes such
confusions because it leads researchers to neglect a formal system’s
empirically established semantics, which defines its relations to the
real system—and thus, these systems’ epistemic separation.
In sum, language and its conventional rules are construals
of human minds, which, at the same time, mediate and shape
individuals’ psychical processes. Its intuitive and ease of use enables
but also obscures its inherently representational function, leading
to common confusions between words and the ‘reality’ that they
denote. When using language-based ‘instruments’, these challenges
are incorporated directly into psychological ‘measurement’.

“When I use the word thinking, I mean precisely that
process of translating what is going on in nature into . . .
symbols . . . [U]sing symbols and using conscious intelligence
has proved very useful to us. It has given us such technology
as we have; but at the same time, it has proved too much of
a good thing. At the same time, we’ve become so fascinated
with it that we confuse the world as it is with the world as it
is thought about, talked about, and figured about—the world
as it is described. The difference between these two is vast. . . ”
(italics as in original; Watts and Watts, 1996, p. 26).
Our ability to use the inbuilt semantics of our natural language
intuitively and with ease, lets us often overlook its representational
nature and confuse our words with ‘reality’.

3.5.2 The map is not the territory, the model is
not reality, the word is not the thing
Korzybski (1933) established general semantics—the study of
language as a representation of ‘reality’. In his critique of traditional
assumptions about language, he illustrated the distinction between
a real object and its formal representation by stating that
“A map is not the territory it represents, but, if correct, it
has a similar structure to the territory, which accounts for its
usefulness” (Korzybski, 1933, p. 58).
Korzybski used the map–territory relation to illustrate the
distinction between our perceptions or beliefs of something and

Frontiers in Psychology

16

18

The menu–food metaphor was also used by Arnulf et al. (2024).

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

3.6 Language-based ‘scales’ obscure the
measurement process

to use rating ‘scales’ with just minimal instruction and without
any training. This differs fundamentally from many kinds of
physical and behavioural measurement (Uher, 2018a, 2021c).
Thus, psychologists capitalise on raters’ and their own intuitive
knowledge and use of natural language and its inbuilt semantics.
The inbuilt semantics of our words—their conventional
meanings—are described in our dictionaries. Words can be
grouped by their dictionary meanings and described in their
semantic relations with other words using logic-based formalisms.
These interrelations between words form semantic networks,
which can be visualised in graphical networks. These networks
describe common structures in the organisation of knowledge
representations and information retrieval pathways that are socially
shared by competent users of a given language (Arnulf et al., 2018;
Pirnay-Dummer et al., 2012). In the semantic space of a language, a
word’s multi-dimensional associations with other words span a field
of meaning (Rosenbaum and Valsiner, 2011; Uher, 2018a, 2022b,
2023a).
The general semantic meaning that language users collectively
construe for a word is derived and abstracted from the specific
meanings that individual users locally construe for it in the
specific contexts of its use. A ‘house’, for example, may mean a
building serving as family quarters, refuge or shelter, but also a
dynasty (House of Windsor), governmental institution (House of
Commons), gathering place for specified activities (coffee house),
or a business organisation (publishing house). That is, words may
refer to concrete observables (e.g., buildings)—thus, they have a
primary literal meaning (denotation). But many words also often
imply interpretations and explanations of their referents (e.g.,
regarding their purpose) or they may be used as metaphors (e.g.,
‘house’ as ‘dynasty’; Lakoff and Johnsen, 2003). Thus, words may
also have additional non-literal meanings (connotations). These
meanings are more abstract and socio-culturally construed and
often cannot be easily traced back anymore to their formerly
concrete references and contexts (Deutscher, 2006).
This also applies to psychology’s study phenomena. Most
behaviours possess various observable features and can therefore
be interpreted differently regarding possibly associated psychical
phenomena (e.g., different intentions or feelings; Shweder, 1977;
Smedslund, 2004; Toomela, 2008; Uher, 2015d). Describing the
act of taking an object as ‘finding’, ‘exploring’, ‘securing’, ‘catching’,
‘seizing’, ‘grabbing’ or ‘stealing’ implies different interpretations
regarding the actor’s (presumed) goals and intentions in the
given context. That is, behaviours can be described in their
momentary and localised physical properties (Uher, 2016b). But
their explanations can go well beyond the here-and-now and
can invoke various interpretive perspectives. These all follow
logical principles (Kelly, 1955; Smedslund, 2004) yet without being
logically determined by the behavioural act itself (Shweder, 1977).
Many words also imply normative evaluations. As members
of the same community, individuals are substantially similar to
one another. Evaluating normativity therefore requires abstracting
from commonalities and focussing instead on minor variations
(e.g., behavioural, facial) that are informative for differentiating
between (groups of) individuals. Promoted by social appraisal
(e.g., valued, sanctioned) and putative explanations (e.g., innate,
intentional), socially relevant variations are often exaggerated.
Then they appear in people’s minds to be larger than they

Psychological ‘measurement’ is unthinkable without everyday
language. It relies on the idea that any phenomenon of interest can
be empirically studied, and even ‘measured’, as long as it can be
verbally described. Accordingly, rating ‘scales’ comprise brief verbal
descriptions of the phenomena with which raters—the persons
using these ‘instruments’—are assumed to interact. While efficient
and easy to use, modelling this process is intricate.

3.6.1 Obscured distinctions between psychical
phenomena, language-based ‘instruments’ and
formal models
In physical measurement, all elements of the real study
system—the objects studied, those used as measuring instruments,
their lawful empirical interactions and the indications thusproduced—are all of physical nature. The model that semiotically
represents selected information about them, however, is formal,
thus non-physical (Figure 2). In psychology, by contrast, real and
formal system cannot be easily distinguished. Psychical phenomena
(e.g., intellectual abilities, beliefs) are non-physical, abstract and
represent information—just as the formal models developed about
them. Language, here used as method and ‘instrument’, is a
complex sign system to communicate information—thus, a formal
system as well. These peculiarities complicate the epistemically
necessary distinction between the real and the formal study system.
It also blurs, within the real system, the distinction between
the phenomena studied and those used as ‘instruments’ for
studying them. This complicates the conceptualisation of how the
‘instruments’ can be used in a given method to produce information
about the study phenomena—psychology’s measurement problem.
These epistemically necessary distinctions are further hindered
by the ambiguous use of the term ‘scale’ in psychology. On the one
hand, it refers to Stevens’ (1946) concept of ‘measurement scales’
which defines variables with specific mathematical properties (e.g.,
ordinal, interval and ratio)—thus, structures of formal models.
On the other hand, the term ‘scales’ denotes the ‘instruments’
that enable empirical interactions with the measurands, just like
physical measuring devices (e.g., weighing scale; Uher, 2022a).
Formal scale and physical scale, however, although coordinated and
calibrated with one another, are epistemically distinct elements of
measurement (Figure 2). In psychology, this distinction is obscured
when the rating items serve both—as descriptions of the study
phenomena in the verbal ‘scale’ and as item variables in the
formal model (Uher, 2018a). But raters interact only with the
item statements of the ‘scales’, not with the statistical models
through which these were designed. So, what function do the item
statements have when used as ‘instruments’?

3.6.2 Specifying the phenomena to be ‘measured’
through the inbuilt semantics of everyday
language: Collective ﬁelds of meanings
Rating items categorise and describe the phenomena to be
‘measured’. Worded in everyday language, this enables lay persons

Frontiers in Psychology

19

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

actually are, thereby acquiring salience (Uher, 2013). Those salient
variations that are considered most important in a language
community may eventually become encoded in words (lexical
hypothesis; Allport and Odbert, 1936; Galton, 1884).
All this entails that everyday language is replete with
inferential assumptions, implicit connotations, socio-cultural
valences, interpretations and putative explanations (Shweder,
1977; Smedslund, 2004). This allows rating items to be worded
such that they refer to a broader range of phenomena and
contexts that raters could consider as well as to capture raters’
interpretation, explanation and normative appraisal of them (Uher,
2015c, 2018a, 2023a). This shows again key differences between
physical measurement and the pragmatic quantifications used in
psychology. They arise from the fact that psychology’s focus is
on the individual (subjective) and socio-cultural (inter-subjective)
interpretations, explanations and appraisals of observable (and
inferred non-observable) phenomena—thus, on the meanings that
these have for individuals and communities. This differs from
physics and metrology, which aim to explore just the phenomena
and their relations in themselves but not also our human experience
and apprehension of them (Uher, 2020b, 2021b; Wundt, 1896).
This also highlights the crucial role of persons in the use of
rating ‘scales’.

FIGURE 6

The inbuilt semantics of rating ‘scales’: collective ﬁeld of an item’s
local context-speciﬁc meanings. The collective general meaning of
the item “tends to ﬁnd fault with others”, used to operationalise the
construct ‘Agreeableness’ in the BFI-10. Its ﬁeld of meaning is
illustrated through the main themes that summarise the local
context-speciﬁc item meanings that N = 112 participants construed
for this item, described in their own words in terms of behaviours
that a ﬁctitious person scoring high on the item (indicated by ‘very
often’) would typically show. Percentages indicate the proportions
of participants providing interpretations that are pertinent to a given
theme (multiple nominations per person possible).

perspective that they consider for a rating. Thus, they construe a
local meaning. Figure 6 summarises the local meanings that 112
research participants independently construed for the item “tends
to find fault with others” from a popular ‘personality’ ‘scale’17 .
It depicts the broad field of meaning that this item statement
collectively had for all raters but also the diversity of local meanings
that they considered individually (Uher, 2018a, 2023a). That is,
some raters read the item as “condescending,” others as “being
picky, rigid,” still others as “having low self-esteem” or “being
perfectionist, honest and upright” (Figure 6). On average, each rater
considered only two different item meanings (M = 2.08; SD =
0.92; range = 1 to 5). No one considered the entire field of meaning.
Thus, when used empirically by raters, standardised rating items
have no unitary meanings.
Such variations in item interpretation, which occur both
between and within individuals, were demonstrated also for other
items of the same questionnaire (Uher, 2018a, 2023a) as well
as in other studies (e.g., Arro, 2013; Lundmann and Villadsen,
2016; Rosenbaum and Valsiner, 2011; Uher and Visalberghi, 2016;
Valsiner et al., 2005; Wagoner and Valsiner, 2005). The general
dictionary meaning of rating items—their inbuilt semantics—can
also be studied with artificial intelligence technologies.

3.6.3 Psychology’s measurement problem is left
to raters’ intuitive decisions and local
interpretations of standardised rating ‘scales’
Physical measurement requires objects used as measuring
instrument that lawfully interact with the objects of research,
thereby producing an indication from which information about
the object’s measurand can be derived. By contrast, languagebased ‘instruments’ themselves cannot interact with anything.
Language involves not lawful relations but rules, which must be
known and applied by persons. That is, language-based methods
require interpretation, which is always context-specific, and thus
variable. Moreover, psychology’s objects of research are (primarily)
human beings and specific phenomena and properties that are
accessible only by persons (e.g., intensity of feelings, strength
of beliefs) or that are studied from their individual perspective
(e.g., perceived frequency, ascribed intentionality or normativity
of others’ behaviours). Therefore, it requires persons (e.g., research
participants, patients) to interpret and use rating ‘instruments’ and
to identify relevant study phenomena. These persons must also
interact with and judge these phenomena for specific purposes
and from specific interpretive perspectives, and they must visibly
indicate the outcomes thus-produced on the rating ‘scale’ (e.g., by
ticking a box). Hence, in psychology, the real study system involves
complex interactions that are executed by persons. These persons
therefore play a crucial epistemic role in the ‘measurement’ process.
Language-based ‘scales’ are standardised through identical
wordings of items and answer categories and are therefore often
thought to mean the same for all raters. This implies the assumption
that all individuals interact with these ‘scales’ in the same ways and
produce indications that have the same meaning for everyone. But
from the entire field of an item’s general meaning, raters construe
only a specific one that matches the context and specific interpretive

Frontiers in Psychology

3.6.4 The inbuilt semantics of rating ‘scales’:
Natural language processing algorithms reveal its
use by raters for mental short-cuts
Natural language processing (NLP) algorithms are types of
artificial intelligence (AI) technologies to computationally analyse
and process human language data. They are used either to identify
specific structures and explicit rules in texts (‘understanding’)
17

20

Big Five 10-item short version (BFI-10; Rammstedt and John, 2007).

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

or to produce texts from the algorithms identified (‘generative’).
NLP algorithms dissect textual data sets (corpora) using statistical,
mathematical or probabilistic methods (e.g., machine learning
techniques). They analyse sentence structures (syntax) and
keywords in order to identify or reproduce patterns and relations
between words in sentences. NLP algorithms can be used, for
example, to correct spelling (autocorrect), predict the next word
given the preceding words (autocomplete), convert spoken words
into written text (speech recognition), translate text from one
language into another (machine translation) or extract the possible
meaning (inbuilt semantics) of a sentence from its keywords
and context or from the words’ dictionary-based interpretation
(content categorisation, automated text summarisation). To enable
this, some NLP algorithms also rely on well-defined semantic
and knowledge representations that are taken from linguistically
established (previously hand-coded) dictionaries (Khurana et al.,
2023). That is, NLP algorithms can formalise structures and explicit
rules that underlie a given natural language and that can use these
to analyse and generate texts.
Analyses of popular rating ‘scales’ with NLP algorithms showed
that the overlap in their items’ inbuilt semantic meanings explained
60%−86% of the variance commonly found in ratings empirically
obtained on these items (e.g., using factor analysis; Arnulf and
Larsen, 2015; Arnulf et al., 2014). This sheds a new light on
psychometrically established nomological networks. Traditionally,
these are interpreted as sets of correlating item variables that encode
the observable indicators (e.g., specific behaviours) through which
a construct is operationalised (e.g., a ‘trait’). Instead, nomological
networks may also largely reflect just the inbuilt semantic networks
underlying the items’ general (dictionary) meanings rather than any
empirically derived structure in the phenomena described (Arnulf
et al., 2024). Hence, ratings may reflect likeness in semantic meaning
rather than co-occurrence likelihood of the phenomena described
(Shweder and D’Andrade, 1980).
This was also demonstrated in multi-method studies.
Associations of observer ratings on behaviour-descriptive items
reflected their inbuilt semantic meanings but not the empirical
patterns by which the described behaviours actually occurred in
the same target individuals. Indeed, time-based measurements of
functionally similar behaviours (e.g., different acts of aggression)
showed only low to moderate internal consistency but substantial
temporal consistency, thus indicating individual specificity
(‘personality’). Observer ratings of the same target individuals on
items describing the same behaviours, by contrast, were internally
consistent—in line with their inbuilt semantic meanings (Uher
et al., 2013a; Uher and Visalberghi, 2016). Thus, the inherently
interpretive perspectives of rating items, reflecting socio-culturally
ascribed valences and normativity, may influence and even bias
perceptions and judgements of their observable referents (Shweder,
1977; Uher, 2022b; Vygotsky, 1962).
All this suggests that raters may use the inbuilt semantics
of rating items also as mental short-cuts to simplify their rating
task. Specifically, as thinking and learning agents, many raters
do not fail to notice that rating ‘scales’ commonly contain, in
randomised order, items with similar content (a necessity for the
psychometric analyses). Therefore, raters may focus on a few salient
referents just for the first items on a ‘scale’. For any items perceived

Frontiers in Psychology

as ‘repetitive’, however, they may generate their responses more
efficiently by focussing just on their inbuilt semantic similarity
instead of construing local meanings and considering specific
referents for each single item anew (Uher, 2015c; Uher et al.,
2013b).
Raters’ locally construed meanings are commonly not
inquired, however. Therefore, it remains unknown which specific
phenomena and contexts they have considered in a given rating,
from which specific perspectives (e.g., normative appraisal) they
have judged them, and how they actually used the item ‘scales’. In
consequence, the distinction between the objects studied and the
objects used as ‘measuring instruments’ is left to intuitive decisions
of raters, who are commonly lay people. The intricate problem of
conceptualising how the methods (and ‘instruments’) interact with
the study phenomena and can provide epistemically justifiable
information about these phenomena—psychology’s measurement
problem—therefore remains undefined and unexplored (Uher,
2022b, 2023a). This ultimately obscures also the relations of the
data and the formal model to the real phenomena under study.

3.6.5 Researchers’ focus on the inbuilt semantics
of rating ‘scales’ obscures the data’s empirical
semantics and syntax
Given that only the raters know how they have interpreted and
used a ‘scale’, only they can know what the rating data ultimately
stand for and refer to—their empirical semantics. When encoding
and analysing rating data, however, psychologists consider only
the items’ general meanings—their inbuilt semantics—ignoring
the fact that raters consider for the same item different local
meanings, different specific phenomena, different contexts and
different interpretive perspectives. These one–to–many relations in
the data’s empirical semantics preclude tracing the data back to
the real phenomena and contexts that raters have considered and
judged and that their ticks on the ‘scales’ were meant to indicate. But
because raters’ decisions are commonly not inquired—despite their
crucial role in the data generation—these breaks in data generation
traceability remain undetected (Figure 7).
Moreover, raters cannot indicate the outcomes of their
interactions with the study phenomena (their judgements) in
ways that they deem suitable for communicating them. Instead,
raters can indicate their judgements only in a bounded set
of verbal response categories that are specified a-priori by the
researchers. We already discussed the syntactic mismatches that
occur in agreement (Likert) ‘scales’ between raters’ primarily
qualitative interpretation of ‘scale’ categories (given their inbuilt
logico-semantic meanings) and researchers’ numerical encoding of
them. Syntactic mismatches can also occur in frequency ‘scales’
when raters are forced to use the same ‘scale’ for different
items—regardless of the phenomena described. Because different
phenomena generally occur at different rates (e.g., chatting vs.
shouting), this requires raters to indicate a broad range of
quantities flexibly in the same ‘scale’. Raters can do so only by
assigning different quantitative meanings to the same response
value—a necessity that violates core ideas of measurement (Uher,
2022a). These syntactic many–to–one relations preclude that raters’
indications on the ‘scale’ can be traced back to the syntactic

21

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

FIGURE 7

Four-fold break in data generation traceability and numerical traceability obscures the data’s empirical semantics and syntax. Based on Uher (2018a,
Figure 15).

relations that they actually considered in the study phenomena.
But these breaks in the numerical traceability of rating data
remain undetected when raters’ rationales for ticking ‘scale’ boxes
(indications) are not inquired and researchers consider instead
only the syntactic relations that they themselves assign to the
‘scale’ categories and their numerical encodings in the data
(Figure 7).
In sum, using language-based ‘scales’ to generate numerical
data introduces several breaks in the semantic and syntactic
relations between real and formal study system. But these
breaks go unnoticed because quantitative psychologists do not
consider raters’ local interpretation and use of item ‘scales’ but
rely instead solely on the items’ inbuilt semantics and on the
syntax that they, as researchers, assign to raters’ numerically
encoded responses. Intuitive reliance on the inbuilt semantics
of language-based methods also obscures the epistemically
necessary distinction between the actual study phenomena
and their verbal descriptions on the ‘instruments’ and leaves
it to raters’ intuitive unknown decisions. In consequence,
researchers cannot assess if their own decisions about how to
encode raters’ responses in numerical data (arrow 2; Figure 3)

Frontiers in Psychology

are appropriate (e.g., logical, consistent) for the real study
phenomena. Researchers also cannot assess if their statistical
analyses of the thus-generated data (arrow 3) as well as their
interpretations of the results obtained are semantically and
syntactically appropriate for the real study system (arrow 4) and
can reveal epistemically justified information about its internal
relations (arrow 1). That is, psychology’s standard practice of
generating quantitative data with rating ‘scales’ fails to empirically
establish the system of interrelated modelling relations that is
required for measurement.

4 Statistics and language-based
methods in quantitative psychology:
Implications and future directions
Language is human’s greatest invention (Deutscher, 2006).
With words, we can refer to objects of consideration even in
their absence (meaning), and although what we say or write
(signifiers) typically bears no inherent relations (e.g., resemblance)
to the objects referred (referents). This representational function

22

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

4.1.1 The inbuilt semantics of language-based
methods obscures the distinction between the
‘instruments’ and the phenomena to be studied

of language—built into its semantics—is internalised in our
minds and fundamental to our abstract thinking. However, we
do not perceive our words just as tokens of the objects to
which they refer but as these objects themselves. In our minds,
we therefore easily mistake the word for the thing, the map
for the territory, the menu for the food—the ‘world’ as it is
with the ‘world’ as it is thought about and described. This
also misguides our scientific thinking at times and leads to
fundamental errors.

The failure to conceptualise measurement processes in many
psychological studies is often due to psychologists’ cardinal
error. This is because, when considering only their items’
inbuilt semantics, psychologists often fail to distinguish the study
phenomena’s descriptions that are used as ‘instrument’ from the
described phenomena themselves that are intended to be studied
(Figure 8). This error often underlies evaluations of face validity
and content validity of psychometric ‘instruments’. It also underlies
the widespread belief that any rating ‘scale’ that is nominally (by
name) associated with a study phenomenon could be a valid
method for empirically studying it (e.g., ‘neuroticism scale’). This
nominalism and toolbox thinking contribute to the proliferation
of overlapping rating ‘scales’ (e.g., various anxiety ‘scales’) and of
the likewise overlapping constructs that their items are meant to
operationally define (Sechrest et al., 1996; Toomela and Valsiner,
2010; Uher, 2021b, 2022b).

4.1 Psychologists’ cardinal error: Failure to
distinguish the ontic study phenomena
from the epistemic means of their
exploration
Our tendency to mistake verbal descriptions for the phenomena
described affects psychology in particular ways because we
can access others’ psychical phenomena never directly but
only mediated through language. Unawareness of its inherently
representational nature—its inbuilt semantics—often obscures the
epistemic necessity to distinguish the study phenomena (e.g., raters’
thoughts or feelings) from their verbal description in the languagebased methods used for exploring these phenomena (e.g., item
‘scales’, variable names). Failure to make this crucial distinction
thus confuses ontological with epistemological concepts—therefore
termed psychologists’ cardinal error (Figure 8; Uher, 2022b, 2023a).
Psychologists’ cardinal error can occur in various parts of
the empirical research process. This logical error makes the
distinction of disparate research elements and activities technically
impossible and distorts basic concepts, methods and result
interpretations (Uher, 2022b, 2023a)—such as in the processes
required for measurement.

4.1.2 Mistaking judgements of verbal statements
for measurements of the phenomena described:
The risk of pseudo-empirical research
Psychologists’ cardinal error also occurs when, through the
inbuilt semantics of item ‘scales’, researchers intuitively establish—
in their minds—relations from their ‘instruments’ to the study
phenomena described. Their (and raters’) mental construction of
these relations (meanings) is necessary to specify the phenomena
(referents) to be considered. But these mental relations only
pre-structure their thinking—they do not, themselves, implement
any empirical relation to the real ‘world’. Yet, because these
relations are thought, they obscure the necessity to scrutinise what
empirical connections are actually implemented in a study—and
thus, what empirical semantics are established for the data thusproduced. ‘Personality’ ratings, for example, enquire about habitual
behaviours, which have necessarily already occurred in the past.
Past events can be mentally (re-)construed. But traceable empirical
interactions with those events, as required for measurement, can no
longer be implemented.
In this way, the inbuilt semantics of language often leads
researchers to misinterpret raters’ judgements of verbal statements
as measurements of the phenomena described in those statements
(Figure 8). The necessity to conceptualise and empirically
implement a coordinated and calibrated system of four interrelated
modelling relations, as described in Rosen’s general process
scheme (Figures 1, 2), gets out of focus—and with it the actual
phenomena under study. This entails the risk of replicating just
verbal descriptions rather than exploring the real phenomena
for which these are meant to stand (Baumeister et al., 2007;
Cialdini, 2009; Doliński, 2018; Osborne-Crowley, 2020; Teigen,
2018; Uher, 2022b, 2023a; Wojciszke and Bocian, 2018). This
puts quantitative psychology at risk of doing pseudo-empirical
research, which mostly re-discovers what is necessarily true given
the logico-semantic relations built into its language-based methods
(Arnulf et al., 2024; Shweder, 1977; Shweder and D’Andrade, 1980;
Smedslund et al., 2022; Smedslund, 1991, 2016b).

FIGURE 8

Psychologists’ cardinal error: Failed distinction between ontological
and epistemological concepts promoted by the inbuilt semantics of
language-based methods.

Frontiers in Psychology

23

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

4.1.3 Advancing just statistical methods and
models: Creating a formal sphere disconnected
from the ‘reality’ to be explored

realist framework required for measurement, thereby misguiding
concepts and theories.
Psychology’s pragmatic quantifications (e.g., rating data, IQ
scores) and statistical analyses (e.g., psychometrics) are useful
for distinguishing individuals by their observable responses or
performances as well as for making decisions and predictions
on the basis of the differences and relations observed. But these
approaches do not constitute measurement because they neither
conceptualise nor empirically implement unbroken traceable
connections between the results and the quantities to be measured
(measurands) in the actual study phenomena. By adapting the
results instead to statistically useful data structures (e.g., group
differences), these approaches cannot explore the performances
or responses observed for their underlying causes. These resultdependent methods thus preclude explorations of the actual study
phenomena, such as what specific intellectual abilities individuals
may use to solve a task or what they consider in their ratings.
In sum, psychology must address the gap that often exist
between its numerical data and statistical models, on the one side,
and its actual study phenomena and the specific quantities to be
measured in them (measurands), on the other. To bridge this gap,
it must advance genuine analogues of measurement.

The focus on statistics leads quantitative psychologists to create
formal spheres in which ever more sophisticated analyses and
models can be developed. In the formal ‘world’, there are no
limits. This, however, ignores the epistemic necessity to empirically
connect the formal models and data with the real study system,
for which they serve only as surrogates—thus, to establish their
empirical semantics. But the inbuilt semantics of the language terms
that are used as data and variables in statistical models often lead
psychologists to mistake the data for the phenomena and the
models for the ‘reality’ described—thus, to commit the cardinal
error of confusing epistemological with ontological concepts. This
confusion creates a data ‘world’, a parallel universe of purely verbal
representations but that has no traceable connections to the real
‘world’. Quantitative psychology then becomes a mere data science.
This empirical break leads many psychologists to overlook
that low replicability is not just an issue of epistemic uncertainty,
which could be remedied with more sophisticated procedures, but
that it also reflects the study phenomena’s ontic indetermination,
variability, changeability and developmental nature. Psychology
must advance concepts and empirical practices that are adapted
to and appropriate for these peculiarities rather than focus only
on what is possible in purely formal (e.g., statistical) systems. We
cannot indulge in ever more complicated formal manipulations
that have no counterparts in the ‘reality’ that we aim to explore
because this entails a proliferation of theories, constructs and
supposed psychical phenomena for which there is little or no actual
evidence. Ever more complicated statistics and their meticulous and
transparent application (e.g., open science) therefore cannot tackle
psychology’s crises (e.g., in replicability, validity, generalisability),
as currently believed, and but will only exacerbate them (Kellen
et al., 2021; Uher, 2021b, 2022b; Uher et al., 2025).

4.2 Genuine analogues of measurement:
Elaborating quantitative psychology’s
epistemological and methodological
fundamentals
Rosen’s process model conceptualises the system of interrelated
modelling relations, which is generally necessary to develop
formal models that are appropriate for exploring real study
systems in empirical sciences (Figure 1). Psychology’s challenge
lies in the necessity to advance for this general process model
specific concepts and practices that meet the peculiarities of its
study phenomena and language-based methods. This is because
quantitative analysis can be informative only when the system
of modelling relations is also empirically implemented—both
semantically and syntactically—rather than just presumed on
the basis of the methods’ inbuilt semantics and researchers’
own syntactic assignments—that quantitative analysis can be
informative at all.

4.1.4 Statistics is not measurement: Psychology’s
pragmatic quantiﬁcations are numerical data with
predictive power but without explanation
The common belief that statistics constitutes measurement is
not just unwarranted. It is also misleading. In both everyday life and
science, the term measurement implies that some part of ‘reality’
is being quantified (e.g., some apples’ weight). Measurement
results are regarded as epistemically justified (e.g., we trust
the shops’ calibrated weighing scales; criterion 1) and publicly
interpretable regarding their specific quantitative meaning for the
object measured (e.g., ‘2kg’ means the same weight everywhere;
criterion 2). This differs from prices, customer ratings and other
quantitative values that are attributed to some objects (e.g.,
apples) for some purposes and uses (e.g., trade, advertising). These
pragmatic quantifications depend on considerations that go beyond
the objects’ specific properties and therefore vary across contexts
and times, as does their specific quantitative meaning.
Quantitative psychologists’ ‘measurement’ jargon alludes to the
epistemic authority of genuine measurement. This misleads the
public (Barrett, 2003, 2018). It also leads researchers themselves
to mistake their purely pragmatic research frameworks for the

Frontiers in Psychology

4.2.1 Metrological frameworks: Adaptations to
psychological research are appropriate only on
the more abstract philosophy-of-science level
Metrology enables accurate and precise measurement
of quantities in non-living phenomena featuring invariant
(unchangeable) relations. Interdisciplinary attempts to translate
and apply metrological concepts rather directly to psychology
(esp. psychometrics), however, overlook fundamental ontic
differences in its complex study phenomena. These involve,
amongst others, variable and context-dependent relations (e.g.,
many–to–one, many–to–many), novel emergent properties
and dynamic multi-level feedback loops leading to continuous
change and development of parts and wholes. Therefore, specific

24

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

relations from observable phenomena (e.g., specific behaviours
or test performances) to non-observable ones (e.g., specific
intentions or intellectual abilities) that apply to all individuals
in all contexts and all times—thus, that are invariant (one–to–
one)—cannot be presumed. The study phenomena’s non-ergodicity
(non-equal synchronic and diachronic variations), as well,
invalidates inferences from sample-level averages to measurands in
single individuals.
Moreover, unlike metrology, psychology explores not just
observable phenomena and their possibly underlying causes in
themselves but also, and in particular, individuals’ subjective and
inter-subjective explanations, interpretations and appraisals of
them. These multi-referential objects of research are conceptualised
as constructs and require language-based methods for their
exploration (Uher, 2022b, 2023a,b). Personality ratings, for
example, were shown to be influenced by raters’ knowledge of
the phenomena and persons to be judged, raters’ attitudes and
relationships to them as well as raters’ interpretation and use
of the ‘scales’ (e.g., items’ inbuilt semantics, redundancy, social
valences), leading to guessing, inattention and bias (e.g., centrality
tendency, social desirability, stereotyping, halo effect; Kenny, 1994;
Leising et al., 2025; Podsakoff et al., 2003; Shweder and D’Andrade,
1980; Tourangeau et al., 2000; Uher and Visalberghi, 2016; Uher
et al., 2013b). That is, raters interact differently with the same
‘instrument’, and even if they consider the same study phenomena
in the same persons, they may invoke, in their ratings, different
interpretational perspectives on them as well as indefinitely
complex contexts. All this entails that rating data represent far more
than just an observable ‘reality’ and always reflect various strong
influences apart from that concrete ‘reality’ as well (Leising and
Schilling, 2025).
That is, both psychology’s complex study phenomena
and its language-based ‘instruments’ are rich in interpretable
information. In metrological frameworks, by contrast, information
is conceptualised only as the outcome of measurement, in the
formal model, whereas the real study system comprises the
physical objects studied, those used as instruments as well as
their empirical interaction (Figure 2; Mari et al., 2021). Therefore,
metrological concepts cannot account for different interpretive
perspectives that persons (raters and researchers alike) can flexibly
and intentionally take on the same object of research as well as on
the same ‘instrument’ and which are described with psychological
constructs. Their conceptualisation is of no interest to metrology
and physics but essential for psychology.
Still, as this article demonstrates, psychology can capitalise
on metrology’s theoretical fundamentals —just on far more
abstract levels than interdisciplinary approaches can consider. This
requires transdisciplinary approaches, as used here, to first make
explicit and compare the different disciplines’ basic ontological
and epistemological presuppositions. This was a prerequisite
for identifying the two abstract methodological principles (e.g.,
data generation traceability and numerical traceability) that
implicitly underlie the metrological framework as well as for
highlighting its direct conceptual connections to Rosen’s general
process scheme. The abstract philosophy of science perspective
taken in transdisciplinarity is also essential to elaborate the
ways in which concepts of physics and metrology, such as the

Frontiers in Psychology

problems of measurement and measurement coordination, can be
meaningfully adapted to psychology to develop genuine analogues
of measurement that are appropriate for its study phenomena’s
peculiarities (Uher, 2018a, 2019, 2020b, 2022a,b, 2023a, 2024).

4.2.2 Epistemically justiﬁed evidence for
psychological research and applied practice:
Requirements and challenges
Researchers and practitioners in applied settings increasingly
highlight that testing theories, hypotheses and the effectiveness of
interventions as well as making decisions about individuals, such
as in clinical, educational and legal settings, require epistemically
justified evidence of the phenomena studied—which the resultdependent approaches of rating methods and psychometrics
cannot provide (Barrett, 2003, 2018; Faust, 2012; Heine and
Heene, 2024; Hobart et al., 2007; Mislevy, 2024; Rosenbaum
and Valsiner, 2011; Truijens, 2017; Uher, 2022b, 2023a). It is
therefore crucial to remedy the empirical breaks that often occur
between psychology’s study phenomena and its pertinent data and
models (Figure 7). This requires elaborate concepts and approaches
of scientific representation that allow for establishing unbroken
traceable connections that are appropriate for mapping formal
systems onto the peculiarities of psychology’s study phenomena
(arrow 2, Figure 2). To achieve this, psychology must also advance
its ontological and epistemological fundamentals (Fahrenberg, 2013,
2015; Hartmann, 1964; Lundh, 2018; Poli, 2006; Uher, 2021b). It
must also advance its methodology, such as to specify the abilities
that data generation methods must have for capturing specific
properties in the study phenomena and for establishing traceable
relations with them (Uher, 2013, 2015c, 2018a; Valsiner, 2017).
All these fundamentals are underdeveloped in quantitative
psychology. Much of its numerical data are still generated with a
simple yet seriously flawed method, developed already a century
ago but still lacking a conceptual foundation. The common
belief that rating ‘scales’ could enable standardised quantitative
inquiries, implying that all individuals respond to standardised
‘verbal stimuli’ in the same ways and produce ‘instrument’
indications that allow for making straightforward inferences on
the phenomena described, is unwarranted. It is surprising—if not
paradoxical—that psychometricians claim that rating ‘scales’ enable
the ‘measurement’ of individual variations while ignoring, at the
same time, pronounced individual variations in the interpretation
and use of these very same ‘scales’. Psychology’s challenges arise
from the peculiarities of its study phenomena (e.g., higher-order
complexity, non-ergodicity) and language-based methods (e.g.,
inbuilt semantics). These make it impossible to establish coherent
measurement models that enable inferences from standardised
instrument indications to non-observable measurands that could
be reliable and valid for all individuals in all contexts and
times. That is, psychology’s problems of measurement, measurement
coordination and calibration cannot be solved on the sample level.
Meanwhile, psychology as a science in general is more
advanced and acknowledges that researchers’ own assumptions,
beliefs, thinking and judgements can (unintentionally) influence
their research methods, theories and findings (Danziger, 1997;
Fahrenberg, 2013; Fleck, 1935; James, 1890; Marsico et al., 2015;

25

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

verbal descriptions of their symptoms on the ‘instruments’ can
change how they interpret their symptoms, how they understand
and experience their own condition and thus, the meaning
that these have for them. Response shifts may also be due to
changes in patients’ subjective frames of reference, the standards
of comparison that they consider, the relative importance that
they ascribe to symptoms, their recall and sampling of salient
experiences, how they combine their appraisals when choosing an
answer box on the ‘scale’, and others (Desmet et al., 2021; Schwartz
and Rapkin, 2004; Truijens et al., 2022; Vanier et al., 2021).
These findings illustrate why breaks in data generation
traceability and numerical traceability occur when rating data
are interpreted solely on the basis of their inbuilt semantics
and researcher-assigned syntax (Figure 7). These and other lines
of research demonstrated that raters’ complex meaning-making
processes must be considered to establish the empirical semantics
and syntax of rating data—thus, their epistemic validity. Epistemic
dialogue and other participative approaches involve both raters’
first-person perspective and researchers’ second-person perspective
in order to probe into researchers’ interpretation of raters’
responses on standardised ‘scales’. This allows for establishing
feedback loops between the real study system and its formal model
(e.g., data) in order to coordinate and calibrate their empirical
semantic and syntactic relations (Lahlou et al., 2015; McClimans,
2024; Truijens et al., 2019a; Uher, 2018a, 2022b, 2023a). These lines
of research show that psychology’s problems of measurement and of
measurement coordination can be tackled on the individual level.

Uher, 2013, 2015b; Weber, 1949). Quantitative psychology is
still lacking behind these advancements (but see Jamieson et al.,
2023). The common belief that quantitative methods could be
generally more objective and free of subjectivity (‘scientific’)—and
thus, superior to others per se (quantificationism)—is erroneous
(Strauch, 1976; Uher, 2022b). Quantitative psychology must
acknowledge the fact that, given the peculiarities of its study
phenomena and of the language-based methods required for
their investigation, (lay) persons (e.g., participants, patients) play
a crucial epistemic role in the data generation process. As an
empirical science, psychology cannot build just on the researchers’
own inferences from the inbuilt semantics of their language-based
methods and on their own assignments of syntactic structures to
their data and models. Such practices are prone to ethnocentric
and egocentric biases on the researchers’ part, leading to distorted
theories and findings (Uher, 2015b, 2020a).
To justify the use of rating ‘scales’ in psychological research
and practice, it is of foremost importance to conceptualise
and empirically explore how raters actually interpret and
use these ‘instruments’. This is a prerequisite for establishing
traceable, coordinated and calibrated connections from the study
phenomena and known reference quantities to the generated results
(data generation traceability, numerical traceability)—thus, for
establishing genuine analogues of measurement (Figure 2; Uher,
2018a, 2019, 2022b, 2023a).

4.2.3 Tackling psychology’s problems of
measurement coordination and calibration on the
individual level: Empirical examples

4.2.4 Establishing the data’s empirical semantics
and syntax: Textual data from individuals’
unrestricted verbal expressions vs. standardised
rating data

Various lines of clinical research (e.g., on quality of life,
chronic disease and therapeutic efficacy) already explored these
problems under terms such as self-rated health (Fayers and
Sprangers, 2002), patient-reported outcomes (PRO; Schwartz and
Rapkin, 2004) and patient-centred measurement (PCM; Howard
et al., 2024; McClimans, 2024; Pesudovs, 2006). They explicitly
consider the fact that patients not only experience different
symptoms, to different degrees and in different ways but also have
diverse and changeable perspectives of their disease, treatment
and quality of life. These researches consider that such complex
study phenomena require for their description multi-referential
conceptual systems (constructs) and language-based methods for
their empirical investigation. Accordingly, they conceptualise in
their methodological fundamentals the fact that patients’ selfratings involve perceptions, judgements, appraisals and also
idiosyncratic criteria (Bosdet et al., 2021; Carr and Higginson, 2001;
Kazdin, 2006; Schwartz and Rapkin, 2004; Truijens et al., 2019b).
This explicit conceptualisation is crucial to explain the
frequent finding that changes in patients’ self-ratings (e.g., prepost treatment) often cannot be fully explained by actual changes
in their health problems. Such response shifts pose challenges
for evidence-based evaluations of clinical theories, treatments
and therapies. They also question the utility of psychometric
approaches for establishing the reliability and validity of assessment
‘scales’. Response shifts were shown to occur for various reasons.
First, they arise from patients’ context-specific local interpretation
of rating ‘scales’. Furthermore, patients’ interactions with the

Frontiers in Psychology

To tackle these problems and to establish the data’s epistemic
validity, psychology must advance efficient methods for studying
verbal descriptions that the studied individuals themselves find most
appropriate to express their experiences. As George Kelly stated
“. . . each person seeks to communicate his [her] distress in
the terms that make sense to him [her], but not necessarily in
terms that make sense to others” (Kelly, 1969, p. 58).
This requires methods for recording individuals’ experiences
and perspectives without restricting their possibilities to verbally
express themselves. This insight is essential for conceptualising
psychology’s measurement problem. Specifically, individuals’
interactions with a language-based ‘instrument’ (e.g., survey
question) and the phenomena under study (e.g., anxieties) as well
as individuals’ indications of the outcomes of these interactions
must be unrestricted and adaptable. Such methods allow for
establishing relations in the real study system that are meaningful
for these individuals themselves. This is crucial for making the
observable (verbal) indications that raters produce informative
about the—for researchers—non-observable study phenomena
and their occurrences to which only raters have access (arrow 1,
Figure 9). This methodical requirement arises from the complex
relations (e.g., many–to–one) in psychology’s study phenomena.

26

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

textual data, such as for specific words, word sequences or
word proximities but also for specific contents, recurrent themes,
concepts or discursive elements, often coded in fuzzy categories.
These can also be further analysed for their occurrences (e.g.,
frequencies, associations and configurations)—thus, for syntactic
(e.g., quantitative) relations. Transparency in the selection and
reduction decisions during coding and analysis makes the
formal model and the results thus-derived as well as their
quantitative meanings traceable to concrete occurrences of verbally
described events. By implementing data generation traceability
and numerical traceability through iterative coordination and
calibration processes, the model’s empirical semantics and syntax
are established—thus, genuine analogues of measurement (Uher,
2022a,b, 2023a).
The known challenges of some of these text analyses (e.g.,
coding biases, limited generalisability) testify to the complexity
of the analytical and interpretational decisions, which are always
required to scientifically categorise—thus, to selectively reduce and
semiotically represent—psychology’s complex study phenomena
and to identify meaningful syntactic relations in them. These
challenges become directly apparent because, in these methods,
they are dealt with in the formal study system, where they can be
explored in documented traceable ways by the researchers themselves
(arrow 3, Figure 9). This also means that information about
the study phenomena, as verbally described by the individuals
experiencing them (arrow 1) and textually encoded in the formal
study system (arrow 2), is scientifically categorised ex post facto—
after the events to be studied have occurred in the real system.
This is essential because, in complex and context-dependent
phenomena, it cannot be predicted which specific events may
occur. For this reason, data generated with open-ended response
formats or participatory procedures can provide rich and indepth insights into human experience, as clinical research has
demonstrated (e.g., on response shifts).
Conceptualising the measurement problem for rating methods,
by contrast, reveals a very different process. For ratings, researchers
categorise their study phenomena aligned to their research
questions and own preconceived ideas ex ante—before knowing
which specific events of interest may actually occur in the real
system studied (e.g., individuals). Researchers verbally describe
these categories in statements whose general meaning derives from
their inbuilt semantics—because no specific events to be described
have yet occurred. These ex ante categorisations, which also serve
as standardised ‘instrument’ indications (e.g., items), therefore
need not be meaningful or even relevant to describe raters’
concrete experiences and perspectives. Left without other options
for expressing themselves, raters must adapt their interactions
and judgements to the rating ‘scale’ provided, thereby producing
indications that are less informative, if at all, about the study
phenomena and raters’ views on them. This entails several breaks
in traceability (Figure 7).

FIGURE 9

Establishing coherent systems of interrelated modelling relations
through traceable encoding and analysis of individuals’ unrestricted
verbal expressions and ex post facto categorisation of study
phenomena.

Metrological measurement models, by contrast, can deal only with
unchangeable one–to–one relations of non-living nature, which
can be identified through identically repeatable experiments. For
this reason, the problems of coordination and calibration can be
tackled on the sample level in metrology.
Individuals’ indications, expressed in their own words, can
be transcribed (e.g., verbatim) into textual data (or obtained
from them in writing). This establishes documented, traceable
and contextualised—yet non-selective and non-reductive—encoding
relations between real and formal study system (arrow 2, Figure 9).
The thus-generated textual raw data are then coded, whereby
elements of individuals’ encoded verbal statements are categorised
into variables for further analysis. This establishes selective and
reductive coding relations, which are likewise contextualised,
unbroken, documented and traceable.18 Thus, crucially, the
selective reductive mapping of the real system’s open domain to
the closed sign system used as its model does not occur in the
encoding relations between real and formal system (arrow 2),
as conceptualised in Rosen’s system. Instead, it occurs in an
additional coding relation within the formal study system (arrow
3). This additional step of formal analysis accounts for the study
phenomena’s complexity, which makes attempts for a priori or
ad hoc selective reduction prone to reductionist biases on the
researchers’ part.
Methods of text analysis (e.g., data mining; content, thematic
or discourse analysis19 ) provide strategies to systematically analyse
18

These are speciﬁed, for example, in the methodological and

epistemological foundations of a given method as well as in internationally
agreed reporting standards (e.g., for so-called ‘qualitative’ methods in Levitt
et al., 2018).

that is to be quantiﬁed must ﬁrst be qualiﬁed in terms of the kind of entity

19

Some of these methods are commonly called ‘qualitative’, as opposed

that it is (Hartmann, 1964). Moreover, many so-called ‘qualitative’ methods

to ‘quantitative’ ones. This polarisation overlooks, however, that any quantity

establish data generation traceability and numerical traceability, thus meet

is always of something—a speciﬁc quality (Kaplan, 1964). Quantities are

the epistemic criteria of measurement, whereas rating methods, commonly

divisible properties of entities of the same kind—the same quality. Anything

regarded as ‘quantitative’, do not (Uher, 2022a,b, 2023a).

Frontiers in Psychology

27

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

Yet, these breaks do not become apparent because the intricate
decisions of how to relate the study phenomena’s structures
and occurrences to the fixed ‘instrument’ indications, both
semantically and syntactically, are left to raters’ intuitive decisions.
Raters construe local meanings for standardised ‘scales’ to make
them meaningful for their specific experiences and contexts.
But how specifically the single raters interact with the methods
(‘instruments’) and the study phenomena and thus, in what ways
their observable indications can provide epistemically justifiable
information about these phenomena remains undocumented and
non-traceable. These relations are complex, variable, contextdependent and changeable. Therefore, they cannot be studied
experimentally (unlike the one–to–one relations studied in
metrology). Thus, in ratings, the selective reductive mapping of the
study phenomena’s open domain to a closed sign system already
occurs in the real study system, inaccessible to researchers (arrow 1,
Figure 10). This masks the tremendous challenges involved in the
selective reduction of psychology’s study phenomena. Moreover,
this closed sign system itself (e.g., item statements) is aligned
not to the specific events to be studied, as these have not yet
occurred (ex ante), but to researchers’ own preconceived ideas and
study questions.
Researchers then encode raters’ chosen indications using
isomorphic mapping relations into rating data (arrow 2, Figure 10).
Each standardised item statement is mapped to one item variable
and interpreted regarding the general meaning of its inbuilt
semantics. Raters’ chosen answer boxes are rigidly encoded into
predefined numerical values to which researchers attribute a
desired syntax (e.g., quantitative meaning). As we have seen,
this operationalist procedure introduces further breaks in the
empirical semantic and syntactic relations between the rating
data and the actual study phenomena (Figure 7). But these
breaks often go unnoticed because, for rating methods, reporting
standards demand traceability (transparency) only for the research
design and statistical analyses (Appelbaum et al., 2018). But

they do not also demand the data variables and values to
be traceable back to occurrences of the study phenomena (as
required, e.g., for ethological observations or software-based
coding of behaviour). Therefore, rating methods preclude the
conceptualisation and empirical implementation of coherent
systems of interrelated modelling relations—and thus, of genuine
analogues of measurement (Uher, 2018a, 2022b, 2023a).
In sum, psychology must invest more efforts to establish the
epistemic validity of its data and models. These efforts can benefit
from the advances made in artificial intelligence.

4.3 Artiﬁcial intelligence: Language
algorithms can support psychological
research but also perpetuate psychologists’
cardinal error
Psychology’s language-based research can capitalise on the
powerful artificial intelligence (AI) technologies that are modelling
human language and that are now available at large scale—
especially NLP algorithms (Section 3.6.4) and large language
models (LLMs). These deep learning machines capitalise on
the foundations of NLPs but build their own internal implicit
algorithms from processing vast textual data sets (e.g., books
and websites). This extensive training enables LLMs to identify,
predict and generate patterns and relations in human languages
with higher adaptability, coherence and contextual relevance
than previous NLPs. Therefore, they can ‘understand’ complex
context, generate human-quality texts with human-like fluency and
‘converse’ in human-like fashion (e.g., ChatGPT).
These performances can meaningfully support psychological
research. But they also trigger our deep-rooted natural tendency
to attribute human characteristics to non-human entities (Hume,
1757). We focus on what appears to be human-like—that is,
anthropo-morphic—but tend to ignore what is human-unlike
(anthropo-centric biases type I and II (Uher, 2015b, 2020a).
This anthropo-centrism profoundly shapes also how we
perceive and engage with AI machines, thereby misleading our
understanding of their capabilities and limitations (Yildiz, 2025).
This applies in particular to the challenges and pitfalls inherent to
language-based AI machines—especially those arising from their
inbuilt semantics.

4.3.1 Efficient transcription and analysis of
individuals’ local context-speciﬁc meanings
expressed in their own words through NLP
algorithms and LLMs
Language algorithms can be used to efficiently analyse
individuals’ unrestricted verbal expressions—from transcription to
the extraction of semantic and syntactic relations in documented
traceable ways. Clinical researchers again pioneered in advancing
methods for capturing and analysing the complexity of individuals’
health conditions. They showed how patients’ responses to wellprompted open-ended questions, expressed in their own words, can
be analysed using machine learning techniques of NLP algorithms
and LLMs. Their enhanced capabilities for analysing language

FIGURE 10

Rating methods: Ex ante categorisation of study phenomena and
restricted instrument indications leave the crucial selective
reduction decisions to raters’ undocumented and non-traceable
considerations.

Frontiers in Psychology

28

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

context enabled more detailed and more accurate assessments of
patients’ heterogeneous and complex mental health conditions than
psychometric ‘scales’—while also being individualised and efficient.
Algorithm-based categorisations of open-ended self-descriptions
discriminated even better between persons diagnosed with specific
clinical conditions (e.g., anxiety, depression) and healthy persons
than did pertinent self-ratings—although psychometric ‘scales’ are
statistically designed and selected for enabling such discriminations
reliably (Islam and Layek, 2023; Kerz et al., 2023; Kjell K. et al., 2021;
Kjell O. et al., 2021; Sikström et al., 2023; Tabesh et al., 2025).
Hence, NLP algorithms and LLMs can be used to efficiently
analyse individuals’ local context-specific meanings, expressed
in their own words, and to extract, summarise and categorise
their general meanings using the AI models’ inbuilt semantics.
Their algorithmic parameters can also extract syntactical (e.g.,
quantitative) information (e.g., frequencies, associations) to
enable further analysis of the identified categories (e.g., group
comparisons). This procedure implements documented and
traceable modelling relations between individuals’ verbally
described experiences (real study system) and the coded data
and models about them (formal study system). This allows for
establishing the results’ empirical semantics and syntax—thus,
their epistemic validity as required for genuine analogues of
measurement. Proponents of rating methods, by contrast, still
adhere to the inverse—yet epistemically invalid—procedure and
therefore use language algorithms for other purposes.

menu on the basis of what can generally be cooked, regardless
of what dishes are actually cooked on a given day. Using
AI algorithms of human languages to design psychometric
‘instruments’ cannot remedy the empirical breaks between real and
formal study system.
Moreover, the basic idea is not new. Lexical approaches
in differential psychology capitalise on the inbuilt semantics of
natural languages, building on the assumption that those individual
differences that are most salient will eventually become encoded
in words. This lexical hypothesis (Galton, 1884; Klages, 1926)
provided a stringent rationale for using the person-descriptive
words in our natural languages to identify a few major dimensions
of individual differences that are considered most important in folk
psychology. This rationale underlies many popular ‘personality’
models developed over the last century (e.g., Big Five, 16PF;
HEXACO; Allport and Odbert, 1936; John et al., 1988; Uher, 2013,
2015c, 2018b).
Despite its enormous importance for taxonomic research,
however, the lexical hypothesis itself remained untested—even
141 years after its first articulation (Toomela, 2010; Uher, 2013;
Westen, 1996). Still little is known about what specifically gets
encoded in a language and how, what may be missed out and
why. Humans invented an estimated 31,000 languages, of which
only some 7,000 still exist (Crystal, 2000). Their vocabularies
differ in what they allow us to describe. Their rules are extremely
diverse, involving not just different scripts and speech patterns
(signifiers) but also different rules that enable and enforce the
communication of different types of information. In different
languages, for example, communicators either cannot or must
indicate—such as by modifying word endings—the reference to
time (tense) and/or the extension over time (aspect); the agent
(voice), state of completion and/or intentionality of actions; the
grammatical gender and/or number of persons, objects, their
attributes and/or actions; the syntactic function of persons, objects
and events in a sentence (declension); the communicator’s relation
to the recipient, intention for communicating and/or source of the
information communicated (e.g., whether from own observation,
hearsay and/or inference), and others (Boroditsky, 2018; Deutscher,
2006, 2010).
That is, everyday language encodes everyday knowledge with
all its socio-cultural biases and insufficiencies. If the everyday
knowledges encoded in the semantics, syntaxes and pragmatics
of our natural languages were epistemically valid and sufficiently
accurate to describe and explain the structures and functions of
human psyche, behaviour and society, then language scientists
(e.g., linguists, philologists) would have long accomplished this
task. But given the tremendous differences between languages,
this strategy is epistemically not justified. Indeed, most AI
technologies were developed in English. English is a mongrel
language whose grammar was simplified already during the
Mediaeval ages, when it was synthesised from Old English,
Welsh, Gaelic, Danish, Norse, French, Old German and other
languages. A focus on English-language algorithms will inevitably
introduce ethno-centric biases, as happened before when AngloAmerican ‘personality’ models (e.g., Five Factor Model) were
claimed to be ‘universally’ valid for all human cultures (Uher,
2015c, 2018b).

4.3.2 Designing rating ‘scales’ with language
algorithms cannot establish the data’s empirical
semantics and syntax as needed for genuine
measurement analogues
Quantitative psychologists increasingly use NLPs and LLMs
to design or improve psychometric ‘scales’. Some aim to reduce
the semantic overlap between ‘scales’ (Huang et al., 2025), to
improve the content validity for specific constructs (Hernandez
and Nie, 2023) or to tackle the incommensurability of constructs
and operationalisations across studies (Wulff and Mata, 2023).
Others aim to improve the prediction of human interpretation
for more “robust, objective assessments” and to “enhance the
scientific rigour” of psychometric tests (Milano et al., 2025). Thus,
the inbuilt semantics of language algorithms is used to predefine
categorisations of study phenomena (standardised statements).
Their general meanings then serve as both ‘instruments’ and item
variables to explore individuals’ local context-specific meanings of
their experiences and views on them. But as we have seen, these
result-dependent procedures lead to several breaks in the thusgenerated data’s and models’ traceability back to the phenomena
studied in the real system (Figure 7). That is, they fail to
establish the resulting model’s empirical semantics and syntax—its
epistemic validity.
This increasingly popular approach corresponds to creating
a city map using well-established cartographic symbols and
structures (e.g., for roads, buildings) yet without mapping it
empirically onto a real city. It creates not a map but just an
image of a city that may but need not exist as depicted. This
is also like polishing the food descriptions on a restaurant’s

Frontiers in Psychology

29

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

Data availability statement

Language algorithms are trained to identify and re-produce
structures in human language—that is, they are modelling humanproduced text or speech. But they cannot and do not establish
relations (meanings) from the written or spoken sentences
(signifiers) to the real ‘world’ (referents) that is being described
in the language they are modelling. It is us, as humans, who
construe, in our minds, these semantic relations to the real
‘world’ described (meanings). Meanings decay with individuals’
minds (e.g., in dementia) and with their lives (Uher, 2015a).
Therefore, languages die out with the persons using them (Crystal,
2000).
Language-based algorithms merely re-produce signifiers
(words) and structures between them in ways that correspond
to those that we use our languages. These structures were
created through the efforts of past generations to mentally
and semiotically represent the real ‘world’ around us and to
communicate about it. AI systems meanwhile mimic these
human-built structures in such sophisticated ways that we can
easily integrate them into our thinking. This makes us inclined
to attribute to the machine our own thinking of the semantic
relations, which are built into our language and internalised in
our minds. But we tend to overlook the fact that it is us who
are thinking these relations, not the machine. This becomes
obvious when we look at texts generated in a language foreign to
us. Without having internalised its semantics, we cannot make
sense of what is written—not mentally relate it to what it stands
for in the real ‘world’ described. The machine cannot do this
for us.
Our human abilities to immediately and effortlessly relate our
language to the real ‘world’ described often leads us to overlook
the crucial difference between the study phenomena and the
means of their exploration (e.g., descriptions). To avoid confusing
ontological and epistemological concepts—psychologists’ cardinal
error—psychologists should have at least some basic knowledge
of human language. This is also necessary to use languagebased algorithms in epistemically justified ways to advance
psychological research.
One of psychology’s key challenges lies in the fact that it
must necessarily rely on lay people’s abilities and their everyday
language. This requires engaging with the individuals studied
rather than distancing ourselves ever more from them by studying
just standardised abstract descriptions of collective meanings
that are predefined by researchers or AI machines. A science
of psychology should advance approaches and methods that are
epistemically justified for exploring its study phenomena in the
specifics and contexts of their occurrences. Therefore, we need
to know how individuals use their natural language and relate it
to the real ‘world’ as they experience and see it in their given
contexts. This knowledge will be crucial to systematically connect
psychology’s language-based data and formal models with the realworld phenomena that these are meant to represent and for which
they serve only as surrogates—thus, to establish genuine analogues
of measurement.

Frontiers in Psychology

The original contributions presented in the study are included
in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be
directed to the corresponding author.

Ethics statement
Ethical review and approval was not required for the
study on human participants in accordance with the local
legislation and institutional requirements. Written informed
consent from the [patients/participants OR patients/participants
legal guardian/next of kin] was not required to participate in
this study in accordance with the national legislation and the
institutional requirements.

Author contributions
JU: Conceptualization, Visualization, Writing – original draft,
Writing – review & editing.

Funding
The author(s) declare that no financial support was received for
the research and/or publication of this article.

Conﬂict of interest
The author declares that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
The author(s) declared that they were an editorial board
member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. This had no impact
on the peer review process and the final decision.

Generative AI statement
The author(s) declare that no Gen AI was used in the creation
of this manuscript.

Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.

30

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

References
Abel, D. L. (2009). The capabilities of chaos and complexity. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 10,
247–291. doi: 10.3390/ijms10010247

Borsboom, D. (2008). Latent variable theory. Measurement 6, 25–53.
doi: 10.1080/15366360802035497

Abel, D. L. (2012). Is life unique? Life 2, 106–134. doi: 10.3390/life2010106

Borsboom, D., Cramer, A. O. J., Kievit, R. A., Scholten, A. Z., and Franić, S. (2009).
“The end of construct validity,” in The concept of validity: Revisions, new directions, and
applications (Charlotte, NC: IAP Information Age Publishing), 135–170.

Abran, A., Desharnais, J.-M., and Cuadrado-Gallego, J. J. (2012). Measurement
and quantification are not the same: ISO 15939 and ISO 9126. J. Softw. 24, 585–601.
doi: 10.1002/smr.496

Borsboom, D., and Mellenbergh, G. J. (2004). Why psychometrics is not
pathological. Theory Psychol. 14, 105–120. doi: 10.1177/0959354304040200

Allevard, T., Benoit, E., and Foulloy, L. (2005). Dynamic gesture recognition
using signal processing based on fuzzy nominal scales. Measurement 38, 303–312.
doi: 10.1016/j.measurement.2005.09.007

Bosdet, L., Herron, K., and Williams, A. C., de C. (2021). Exploration of
hospital inpatients’ use of the verbal rating scale of pain. Front. Pain Res. 2:723520.
doi: 10.3389/fpain.2021.723520

Allport, G. W., and Odbert, H. S. (1936). Trait names: a psycholexical study. Psychol.
Monogr. 47, 1–171. doi: 10.1037/h0093360

Carr, A. J., and Higginson, I. J. (2001). Are quality of life measures patient centred?
BMJ. 322, 1357–1360. doi: 10.1136/bmj.322.7298.1357

Appelbaum, M., Cooper, H., Kline, R. B., Mayo-Wilson, E., Nezu, A. M., and Rao, S.
M. (2018). Journal article reporting standards for quantitative research in psychology:
The APA Publications and Communications Board task force report. Am. Psychol. 73,
3–25. doi: 10.1037/amp0000191

Chang, H. (2004). Inventing Temperature: Measurement and Scientific Progress.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. doi: 10.1093/0195171276.001.0001
Cialdini, R. B. (2009). We have to break up. Persp. Psychol. Sci. 4, 5–6.
doi: 10.1111/j.1745-6924.2009.01091.x

Arnulf, J. K. (2020). “Wittgenstein’s revenge: how semantic algorithms can help
survey research escape Smedslund’s labyrinth,” in Respect for thought, eds. T. G.
Lindstad, E. Stänicke, and J. Valsiner (Cham: Springer International Publishing),
285–307. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-43066-5_17

Cicchetti, D., and Rogosch, F. A. (1996). Equifinality and multifinality
in
developmental
psychopathology.
Dev.
Psychopathol.
8,
597–600.
doi: 10.1017/S0954579400007318

Arnulf, J. K., and Larsen, K. R. (2015). Overlapping semantics of leadership
and heroism: Expectations of omnipotence, identification with ideal leaders and
disappointment in real managers. Scand. Psychol. 2:e3. Available online at: https://ssrn.
com/abstract=3716109 (accessed July 30, 2023).

Cronbach, L. J., and Meehl, P. E. (1955). Construct validity in psychological tests.
Psychol. Bull. 52, 281–302. doi: 10.1037/h0040957
Crystal, D. (2000). Language Death. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi: 10.1017/CBO9781139106856

Arnulf, J. K., Larsen, K. R., and Martinsen, Ø. L. (2018). Semantic algorithms can
detect how media language shapes survey responses in organizational behaviour. PLoS
ONE 13:e0207643. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0207643

Danziger, K. (1985). The methodological imperative in psychology. Philos. Soc. Sci.
15, 1–13. doi: 10.1177/004839318501500101

Arnulf, J. K., Larsen, K. R., Martinsen, Ø. L., and Bong, C. H. (2014). Predicting
survey responses: How and why semantics shape survey statistics on organizational
behaviour. PLoS ONE 9:e106361. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106361

Danziger, K. (1990). Constructing the Subject: Historical Origins of
Psychological Research. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511524059

Arnulf, J. K., Olsson, U. H., and Nimon, K. (2024). Measuring the menu, not the
food: “psychometric” data may instead measure “lingometrics” (and miss its greatest
potential). Front. Psychol. 15:1308098. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1308098

Danziger, K. (1997). Naming the Mind: How Psychology Found its Language.
London, UK: Sage. doi: 10.4135/9781446221815
Danziger, K., and Dzinas, K. (1997). How psychology got its variables. Canadian
Psycholo. 38, 43–48. doi: 10.1037/0708-5591.38.1.43

Arro, G. (2013). Peeking into personality test answers: Inter- and
intraindividual variety in item interpretations. Integr. Psychol. Behav. Sci. 47,
56–76. doi: 10.1007/s12124-012-9216-9

Dawes, R., Faust, D., and Meehl, P. E. (1989). Clinical versus actuarial judgment.
Science 243, 1668–1674. doi: 10.1126/science.2648573

Atmanspacher, H. (1997). Cartesian cut, Heisenberg cut, and the concept of
complexity. World Fut. 49, 333–355. doi: 10.1080/02604027.1997.9972639

Dennett, D. (2012). A perfect and beautiful machine’: What Darwin’s theory of
evolution reveals about artificial intelligence. The Atlantic, June 22. Available online
at: http://hdl.handle.net/10427/000489 (accessed October 23, 2024).

Baianu, I. C., and Poli, R. (2011). From simple to highly complex systems: a
paradigm shift towards non-Abelian emergent system dynamics and meta-levels. Acta
Univ. Apulen. 26, 131–167. Available online at: https://www.emis.de/journals/AUA/
pdf/57_410_no_10_acta_barni.pdf (accessed May 4, 2024).

Desmet, M., Van Nieuwenhove, K., De Smet, M., Meganck, R., Deeren, B., Van
Huele, I., et al. (2021). What too strict a method obscures about the validity of outcome
measures. Psychother. Res. 31, 882–894. doi: 10.1080/10503307.2020.1865584

Barrett, L. F., Mesquita, B., and Smith, E. R. (2010). “The context principle,” in The
mind in context, eds. B. Mesquita, L. F. Barrett, and E. R. Smith (New York, NY, US:
The Guilford Press), 1–22.

Deutscher, G. (2006). The Unfolding of Language: The Evolution of Mankind’s
Greatest Invention. London, UK: Arrow.
Deutscher, G. (2010). Through the Language Glass: Why the World Looks Different in
Other Languages. New York, NY, US: Metropolitan Books/Henry Holt and Company.

Barrett, P. (2003). Beyond psychometrics. J. Manag. Psychol. 18, 421–439.
doi: 10.1108/02683940310484026

Doliński, D. (2018). Is psychology still a science of behaviour? Soc. Psychol. Bull.
13:e25025. doi: 10.5964/spb.v13i2.25025

Barrett, P. (2018). The EFPA test-review model: when good intentions meet a
methodological thought disorder. Behav. Sci. 8:5. doi: 10.3390/bs8010005

Eronen, M. I. (2024). Causal complexity and psychological measurement. Philos.
Psychol. 1–16. doi: 10.1080/09515089.2023.2300693

Baumeister, R. F., Vohs, K. D., and Funder, D. C. (2007). Psychology
as the science of self-reports and finger movements: whatever happened to
actual behavior? Persp. Psychol. Sci. 2, 396–403. doi: 10.1111/j.1745-6916.2007.
00051.x

Fahrenberg,
J.
(2013).
Zur
Kategorienlehre
der
Psychologie:
Komplementaritätsprinzip; Perspektiven und Perspektiven-Wechsel [On the category
theory of psychology: Principle of complementarity, perspectives and changes of
perspectives]. Lengerich, Germany: Pabst Science Publishers.

Bergman, L. R., and Trost, K. (2006). The person-oriented versus the variableoriented approach: are they complementary, opposites, or exploring different worlds?
Merrill Palmer Q. 52, 601–632. doi: 10.1353/mpq.2006.0023

Fahrenberg, J. (2015). Theoretische Psychologie - Eine Systematik der Kontroversen.
Lengerich, Germany: Pabst Science Publishers.

Bernstein, J. H. (2015). Transdisciplinarity: a review of its origins, development, and
current issues. J. Res. Pract. 11:412. https://jrp.icaap.org/index.php/jrp/article/view/
510.html (accessed September 23, 2019).

Faust, D. (2012). Ziskin’s Coping With Psychiatric and Psychological Testimony.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. doi: 10.1093/med:psych/9780195174113.001.0001

BIPM (2019). BIPM: The international system of units (SI) (9th ed). Organisation
Intergouvernementale de la Convention du Mètre. Available online at: https://www.
bipm.org/documents/20126/41483022/SI-Brochure-9-EN.pdf (accessed October 24,
2024).

Fayers, P. M., and Sprangers, M. A. G. (2002). Understanding self-rated health.
Lancet 359, 187–188. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(02)07466-4
Finkelstein, L. (2003). Widely, strongly and weakly defined measurement.
Measurement 34, 39–48. doi: 10.1016/S0263-2241(03)00018-6

Birkhoff, G. D. (1931). Proof of the ergodic theorem. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 17,
656–660. doi: 10.1073/pnas.17.2.656

Fisher, W. P. (2009). Invariance and traceability for measures of human,
social, and natural capital: theory and application. Measurement 42, 1278–1287.
doi: 10.1016/j.measurement.2009.03.014

Boring, E. G. (1923). Intelligence as the tests test it. New Republic. 36, 35–37.
Boroditsky, L. (2018). 7,000 Universes: How the Languages We Speak Shape the
Ways We Think. Toronto: Doubleday Canada.

Fisher, W. P., and Pendrill, L. (2024). Models, Measurement, and Metrology
Extending the SI. Trust and Quality Assured Knowledge Infrastructures. Berlin: De
Gruyter Oldenbourg. doi: 10.1515/9783111036496

Borsboom, D. (2005). Measuring the Mind: Conceptual Issues in
Contemporary Psychometrics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511490026

Frontiers in Psychology

Fleck, L. (1935). Entstehung und Entwicklung einer wissenschaftlichen Tatsache.
Einführung in die Lehre vom Denkstil und Denkkollektiv. Frankfurt am Main::

31

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

Kerz, E., Zanwar, S., Qiao, Y., and Wiechmann, D. (2023). Toward explainable
AI (XAI) for mental health detection based on language behavior. Front. Psychiat.
14:1219479. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1219479

Suhrkamp. English translation: (1979). The Genesis and Development of a Scientific Fact
(T. J. Trenn and R. K. Merton, Eds.) Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Frigg, R., and Nguyen, J. (2021). “Scientific representation,” in The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy ed. E. Zalta. Available online at: https://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/win2021/entries/scientific-representation (accessed June 23, 2023).

Khatin-Zadeh, O., Eskandari, Z., Farsani, D., and Banaruee, H. (2025). Dynamic
mathematical processing through symbolic, situational, and verbal representations.
Integr. Psychol. Behav. Sci. 59:33. doi: 10.1007/s12124-025-09899-3

Galton, F. (1884). Measurement of character. Fortnightly Rev. 36, 179–185.

Khurana, D., Koli, A., Khatter, K., and Singh, S. (2023). Natural language processing:
state of the art, current trends and challenges. Multimed. Tools Appl. 82, 3713–3744.
doi: 10.1007/s11042-022-13428-4

Gibbs, P., and Beavis, A. (2020). Contemporary Thinking on Transdisciplinary
Knowledge: What Those Who Know, Know. Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-39785-2

Kjell, K., Johnsson, P., and Sikström, S. (2021). Freely generated word responses
analyzed with artificial intelligence predict self-reported symptoms of depression,
anxiety, and worry. Front. Psychol. 12:602581. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.602581

Hance, J. R., and Hossenfelder, S. (2022). What does it take to solve the measurement
problem? J. Phys. Commun. 6:102001. doi: 10.1088/2399-6528/ac96cf
Hartmann, N. (1964). Der Aufbau der realen Welt. Grundriss der allgemeinen
Kategorienlehre [The structure of the real world. Outline of the general theory of
categories] 1940 (3rd ed.). Berlin: Walter de Gruyter. doi: 10.1515/9783110823844

Kjell, O., Daukantaite, D., and Sikström, S. (2021). Computational language
assessments of harmony in life — Not satisfaction with life or rating scales — correlate
with cooperative behaviors. Front. Psychol. 12:601679. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.601679

Harvard, S., and Winsberg, E. (2022). The epistemic risk in representation. Kennedy
Inst. Ethics J. 31, 1–31. doi: 10.1353/ken.2022.0001

Klages, L. (1926). Grundlagen der Charakterkunde [The science of character; W.H.
Johnston, Trans. 1932]. London: Allen and Unwin.

Heine, J.-H., and Heene, M. (2024). Measurement and mind: Unveiling
the self-delusion of metrification in psychology. Measurement 2024, 1–29.
doi: 10.1080/15366367.2024.2329958

Korzybski, A. (1933). Science and sanity. An introduction to non-Aristotelian
systems and general semantics. The International Non-Aristotelian Library Publication
Company. Available online at: https://archive.org/details/sciencesanityint00korz/page/
n7/mode/2up (accessed March 3, 2025).

Heisenberg, W. (1927). Über den anschaulichen Inhalt der quantentheoretischen
Kinematik und Mechanik [On The Actual Content of Quantum
Theoretical Kinematics and Mechanics]. Zeitschrift Für Physik. 43, 172–198.
doi: 10.1007/BF01397280

Krantz, D., Luce, R. D., Tversky, A., and Suppes, P. (1971). Foundations of
Measurement Vol. I: Additive and Polynomial Representations. San Diego: Academic
Press. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-425401-5.50011-8

Hempel, C. G. (1952). “Fundamentals of concept formation in empirical science,” in
International Encyclopedia of Unified Science, ed. H. C. Gustav (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press).

Lahlou, S., Le Bellu, S., and Boesen-Mariani, S. (2015). Subjective evidence based
ethnography: method and applications. Integr. Psychol. Behav. Sci. 49, 216–238.
doi: 10.1007/s12124-014-9288-9

Hernandez, I., and Nie, W. (2023). The AI-IP: Minimizing the guesswork of
personality scale item development through artificial intelligence. Pers. Psychol. 76,
1011–1035. doi: 10.1111/peps.12543

Lakoff, G., and Johnsen, M. (2003). Metaphors We Live by. London: The University
of Chicago press. doi: 10.7208/chicago/9780226470993.001.0001

Hobart, J. C., Cano, S. J., Zajicek, J. P., and Thompson, A. J. (2007). Rating
scales as outcome measures for clinical trials in neurology: problems, solutions, and
recommendations. Lancet Neurol. 6, 1094–1105. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(07)70290-9

Lamiell, J. (2018). From psychology to psychodemography: How the adoption of
population-level statistical methods transformed psychological science. Am. J. Psychol.
131, 471–475. doi: 10.5406/amerjpsyc.131.4.0471

Howard, A. F., Warner, L., Cuthbertson, L., and Sawatzky, R. (2024). Patient-driven
research priorities for patient-centered measurement. BMC Health Serv. Res. 24:735.
doi: 10.1186/s12913-024-11182-x

Lamiell, J. (2019). Psychology’s Misuse of Statistics and Persistent Dismissal of its
Critics. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-12131-0
Leinster, T. (2014). Basic Category Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi: 10.1017/CBO9781107360068

Huang, Z., Long, Y., Peng, K., and Tong, S. (2025). An embedding-based semantic
analysis approach: A preliminary study on redundancy detection in psychological
concepts operationalized by scales. J. Intell. 13:11. doi: 10.3390/jintelligence13010011
Hume, D. (1757). 1957 The Natural History of Religion. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.

Leising, D., Borgstede, M., Burger, J., Zimmermann, J., Bäckström, M., Oltmanns,
J., et al. (2025). Why do judgments on different person-descriptive attributes correlate
with one another? A conceptual analysis with relevance for most psychometric
research. Collabra: Psychol. 11:133683. doi: 10.1525/collabra.133683

Islam, R., and Layek, M. A. (2023). StackEnsembleMind: Enhancing well-being
through accurate identification of human mental states using stack-based ensemble
machine learning. Inform. Med. Unlocked 43:101405. doi: 10.1016/j.imu.2023.101405

Leising, D., and Schilling, R. L. (2025). A mathematical model of
person judgment part 1: Cue emergence. Person. Sci. 6:27000710241291544.
doi: 10.1177/27000710241291543

James, W. (1890). Principles of Psychology (Vol. 1). New York, NY: Holt.
doi: 10.1037/10538-000

Lennox, J. (2024). Robert Rosen and Relational System Theory: An Overview. Cham:
Springer. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-51116-5

Jamieson, M. K., Govaart, G. H., and Pownall, M. (2023). Reflexivity in quantitative
research: a rationale and beginner’s guide. Soc. Personal. Psychol. Compass 17:e12735.
doi: 10.1111/spc3.12735

Levitt, H. M., Bamberg, M., Creswell, J. W., Frost, D. M., Josselson, R., and
Suárez-Orozco, C. (2018). Journal article reporting standards for qualitative primary,
qualitative meta-analytic, and mixed methods research in psychology: the APA
Publications and Communications Board task force report. Am. Psychol. 73, 26–46.
doi: 10.1037/amp0000151

JCGM100:2008 (2008). Evaluation of measurement data – Guide to the expression
of uncertainty in measurement (GUM). Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology
(originally published in 1993). doi: 10.59161/JCGM100-2008E

Lewin, K. (1936). Principles of Topological Psychology. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.

JCGM200:2012 (2012). International vocabulary of metrology – Basic and general
concepts and associated terms (VIM 3rd edition). Working Group 2 (Eds.), Joint
Committee for Guides in Metrology. doi: 10.59161/JCGM200-2012

Likert, R. (1932). A technique for the measurement of attitudes. Arch. Psychol.
22, 1–55.
Linkov, V. (2024). Qualitative (pure) mathematics as an alternative to measurement.
Front. Psychol. 15:1374308. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1374308

John, O. P., Angleitner, A., and Ostendorf, F. (1988). The lexical approach to
personality: a historical review of trait taxonomic research. Eur. J. Pers. 2, 171–203.
doi: 10.1002/per.2410020302

Luce, R. D., Krantz, D., Suppes, P., and Tversky, A. (1990). Foundations of
Measurement, Vol. III: Representation, Axiomatization, and Invariance. San Diego, CA,
US. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-425403-9.50010-2

Kane, M. T. (2013). Validating the interpretations and uses of test scores. J. Educ.
Measur. 50, 1–73. doi: 10.1111/jedm.12000

Luchetti, M. (2020). From successful measurement to the birth of a law:
disentangling coordination in Ohm’s scientific practice. Stud. History Philos. Sci. Part
A 84, 119–131. doi: 10.1016/j.shpsa.2020.09.005

Kaplan, A. (1964). The Conduct of Inquiry: Methodology for Behavioral Science.
Scranton, PA: Chandler Publishing Co.
Kazdin, A. E. (2006). Arbitrary metrics: implications for identifying evidence-based
treatments. Am. Psychol. 61, 42–71. doi: 10.1037/0003-066X.61.1.42

Luchetti, M. (2024). Epistemic circularity and measurement validity in quantitative
psychology: insights from Fechner’s psychophysics. Front. Psychol. 15:1354392.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1354392

Kellen, D., Davis-Stober, C. P., Dunn, J. C., and Kalish, M. L. (2021). The problem
of coordination and the pursuit of structural constraints in psychology. Persp. Psychol.
Sci. 16, 767–778. doi: 10.1177/1745691620974771

Lundh, L.-G. (2018). Psychological science within a three-dimensional ontology.
Integr. Psychol. Behav. Sci. 52, 52–66. doi: 10.1007/s12124-017-9412-8

Kelly, G. (1955). The Psychology of Personal Constructs (Volume 1 and 2). London,
UK: Routledge.

Lundmann, L., and Villadsen, J. W. (2016). Qualitative variations in personality
inventories: subjective understandings of items in a personality inventory. Qual. Res.
Psychol. 13, 166–187. doi: 10.1080/14780887.2015.1134737

Kelly, G. (1969). “The autobiography of a theory (1963),” in Clinical psychology and
personality: The selected papers of George Kelly, ed. B. Maher (New York: Wiley), 46–65.

Luria, A. (1966). Higher Cortical Functions in Man. New York: Basic Books.

Kenny, D. A. (1994). Interpersonal Perception: A Social Relations Analysis. London:
Guilford Press.

Frontiers in Psychology

Mach, E. (1986). Principles of the Theory of Heat Historically and Critically
Elucidated. D. Reidel Publishing Company.

32

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

Maraun, M. D., and Gabriel, S. M. (2013). Illegitimate concept equating in the
partial fusion of construct validation theory and latent variable modeling. New Ideas
Psychol. 31, 32–42. doi: 10.1016/j.newideapsych.2011.02.006

Nowotny, H. (2005). The increase of complexity and its reduction: emergent
interfaces between the natural sciences, humanities and social sciences. Theory, Cult.
Soc. 22, 15–31. doi: 10.1177/0263276405057189

Maraun, M. D., and Halpin, P. F. (2008). Manifest and latent variates. Measurement
6, 113–117. doi: 10.1080/15366360802035596

Ogden, C. K., and Richards, I. A. (1923). The Meaning of Meaning: A Study of the
Influence of Language Upon Thought and of the Science of Symbolism. Orlando, FL:
Harcourt, Brace and World.

Margenau, H. (1950). The Nature of Physical Reality. A Philosophy of Modern
Physics. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Olsson, E. (2023). “Coherentist theories of epistemic justification,” in The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, E. N. Zalta and U. Nodelman. Available online at: https://
plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2023/entries/justep-coherence (accessed February 23,
2024).

Mari, L., Carbone, P., Giordani, A., and Petri, D. (2017). A structural interpretation
of measurement and some related epistemological issues. Stud. History Philos. Sci. 65,
46–56. doi: 10.1016/j.shpsa.2017.08.001

Osborne-Crowley, K. (2020). Social cognition in the real world: Reconnecting
the study of social cognition with social reality. Rev. General Psychol. 24, 144–158.
doi: 10.1177/1089268020906483

Mari, L., Carbone, P., and Petri, D. (2015). “Fundamentals of hard and soft
measurement,” in Modern measurements: Fundamentals and applications, eds. A.
Ferrero, D. Petri, P. Carbone, and M. Catelani (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons),
203–262. doi: 10.1002/9781119021315.ch7

Pattee, H. H. (2001). The physics of symbols: bridging the epistemic cut. BioSystems
60, 5–21. doi: 10.1016/S0303-2647(01)00104-6

Mari, L., Wilson, M., and Maul, A. (2021). Measurement Across the Sciences.
Developing a Shared Concept System For Measurement. Cham: Springer.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-65558-7

Pattee, H. H. (2013). Epistemic, evolutionary, and physical conditions for biological
information. Biosemiotics 6, 9–31. doi: 10.1007/s12304-012-9150-8

Marsico, G., Andrisano Ruggieri, R., and Salvatore, S. (2015). Reflexivity and
Psychology. Charlotte, NC, USA: Information Age Publishing.

Pattee, H. H. (2021). Symbol grounding precedes interpretation. Biosemiotics 14,
561–568. doi: 10.1007/s12304-021-09458-4

Mason, P. H. (2010). Degeneracy at multiple levels of complexity. Biol. Theory 5,
277–288. doi: 10.1162/BIOT_a_00041

Peirce, C. S. (1958). Collected papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, Vols. 1-6, C.
Hartshorne and P. Weiss (eds.), vols. 7-8, A. W. Burks (ed.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

McClimans, L. (2024). Patient-Centered Measurement: Ethics, Epistemology,
and Dialogue in Contemporary Medicine. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi: 10.1093/oso/9780197572078.001.0001

Pesudovs, K. (2006). Patient-centred measurement in ophthalmology – a paradigm
shift. BMC Ophthalmol. 6:25. doi: 10.1186/1471-2415-6-25
Piaget, J. (1972). “The epistemology of interdisciplinary relationships,” in Centre for
Educational Research and Innovation (CERI), Interdisciplinarity: Problems of teaching
and research in universities (Paris, France: Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development), 127–139.

McClimans, L., Browne, J., and Cano, S. (2017). Clinical outcome measurement:
Models, theory, psychometrics and practice. Stud. History Philos. Sci. 65, 67–73.
doi: 10.1016/j.shpsa.2017.06.004
McGrane, J. A. (2015). Stevens’ forgotten crossroads: the divergent measurement
traditions in the physical and psychological sciences from the mid-twentieth century.
Front. Psychol. 6:431. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00431

Pirnay-Dummer, P., Ifenthaler, D., and Seel, N. M. (2012). “Semantic networks,” in
Encyclopedia of the Sciences of Learning, ed. N. M. Seel (Boston, MA: Springer US),
3025–3029. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-1428-6_1933

Messick, S. (1995). Validity of psychological assessment: validation of
inferences from persons’ responses and performances as scientific inquiry
into score meaning. Am. Psychologist 50, 741–749. doi: 10.1037/0003-066X.50.
9.741

Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Lee, J.-Y., and Podsakoff, N. P. (2003).
Common method biases in behavioral research: a critical review of the literature and
recommended remedies. J. Appl. Psychol. 88, 879–903. doi: 10.1037/0021-9010.88.5.879
Pohl, C. (2011). What is progress in transdisciplinary research? Futures 43, 618–626.
doi: 10.1016/j.futures.2011.03.001

Michaelis, L. A. (2003). “Word meaning, sentence meaning, and syntactic
meaning,” in Cognitive approaches to lexical semantics, eds. H. Cuyckens, R.
Dirven, and J. R. Taylor (Berlin, New York: De Gruyter Mouton), 163–210.
doi: 10.1515/9783110219074.163

Poli, R. (2006). Levels of reality and the psychological stratum. Rev. Int. Philos. 236,
163–180. doi: 10.3917/rip.236.0163

Michell, J. (1999). Measurement in Psychology. A Critical History of a Methodological
Concept. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi: 10.1017/CBO97805114
90040

Porter, T. M. (1995). Trust in Numbers: The Pursuit of Objectivity in Science and
Public Life. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. doi: 10.1515/9781400821617
Ramage, M., and Shipp, K. (2020). Systems Thinkers (2nd ed.). London, UK:
Springer. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4471-7475-2

Mikulecky, D. C. (2000). Robert Rosen: the well-posed question and its answer
- why are organisms different from machines? Syst. Res. Behav. Sci. 17, 419–432.
doi: 10.1002/1099-1743(200009/10)17:5<419::AID-SRES367>3.0.CO;2-D

Rammstedt, B., and John, O. P. (2007). Measuring personality in one minute or less:
A 10-item short version of the Big Five Inventory in English and German. J. Res. Pers.
41, 203–212. doi: 10.1016/j.jrp.2006.02.001

Mikulecky, D. C. (2001). Robert Rosen (1934–1998): a snapshot of biology’s
Newton. Comput. Chem. 25, 317–327. doi: 10.1016/S0097-8485(01)00079-1

Rashevsky, N. (1960a). Contributions to relational biology. Bull. Math. Biophys. 22,
73–84. doi: 10.1007/BF02477973

Mikulecky, D. C. (2011). Even more than life itself: beyond complexity. Axiomathes
21, 455–471. doi: 10.1007/s10516-010-9119-7

Rashevsky, N. (1960b). Mathematical Biophysics: Physico-Mathematical Foundations
of Biology (vol. 1–2), first published in 1938. New York: Dover Publications.

Milano, N., Luongo, M., Ponticorvo, M., and Marocco, D. (2025). Semantic
analysis of test items through large language model embeddings predicts apriori factorial structure of personality tests. Curr. Res. Behav. Sci. 8:100168.
doi: 10.1016/j.crbeha.2025.100168

Reichenbach, H. (1920). Relativitätstheorie und Erkenntnis Apriori [Relativity theory
and apriori knowledge]. Berlin: Springer. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-50774-8

Mislevy, R. J. (2024). Sociocognitive and argumentation perspectives on
psychometric modeling in educational assessment. Psychometrika 89, 64–83.
doi: 10.1007/s11336-024-09966-5

Richters, J. E. (2021). Incredible utility: the lost causes and causal
debris of psychological science. Basic Appl. Soc. Psych. 43, 366–405.
doi: 10.1080/01973533.2021.1979003

Molenaar, P. C. M., and Campbell, C. G. (2009). The new personspecific paradigm in psychology. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 18, 112–117.
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8721.2009.01619.x

Rød, J. (2004). Cartographic signs and arbitrariness. Cartographica 39, 27–36.
doi: 10.3138/4462-2125-1312-217T

Montuori, A. (2008). “Foreword: transdisciplinarity,” in Transdisciplinarity: Theory
and practice, ed. B. Nicolescu (Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press).

Romeijn, J.-W. (2017). “Philosophy of statistics,” in The Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy, ed. E. Zalta. Available online at: https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/
spr2017/entries/statistics (accessed January 21, 2024).

Morin, E. (1992). Method: Towards a Study of Humankind. Volume 1: The nature of
nature. (J. L. R. Belanger, Trans.). New York, US: Peter Lang.

Rosen, R. (1970). Dynamical Systems Theory in Biology. New York:
Wiley Interscience.
Rosen, R. (1985). Anticipatory Systems: Philosophical, Mathematical, and
Methodological Foundations. New York: Elsevier Science and Technology Books.

Morin, E. (2008). On Complexity. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.
Narens, L. (2002). A meaningful justification for the representational theory of
measurement. J. Math. Psychol. 46, 746–768. doi: 10.1006/jmps.2002.1428

Rosen, R. (1991). Life itself. A comprehensive inquiry into the nature, origin, and
fabrication of life. New York: Columbia University Press.

Newfield, C., Alexandrova, A., and John, S. (2022). Limits of the Numerical:
The Abuses and Uses of Quantification. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
doi: 10.7208/chicago/9780226817163.001.0001

Rosen, R. (1999). Essays on Life itself. New York: Columbia University Press.

Nicolescu, B. (2002). Manifesto of Transdisciplinarity 1996 (K. C. Voss, Trans.).
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.

Rosenbaum, P. J., and Valsiner, J. (2011). The un-making of a method: from
rating scales to the study of psychological processes. Theory Psychol. 21, 47–65.
doi: 10.1177/0959354309352913

Nicolescu, B. (2008). “In vitro and in vivo knowledge: Methodology of
transdisciplinarity,” in Transdisciplinarity: Theory and practice, ed. B. Nicolescu
(Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press), 1–21.

Rudolph, L. (2013). Qualitative Mathematics for the Social Sciences. Mathematical
Models for Research on Cultural Dynamics. (L. Rudolph, Ed.). London: Routledge.
doi: 10.4324/9780203100806

Frontiers in Psychology

33

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

Russell, Y. I. (2022). Three problems of interdisciplinarity. Avant 13, 1–19.
doi: 10.26913/ava202206

Thomas, M. A. (2019). Mathematization, not neasurement: a critique of Stevens’
scales of measurement. J. Methods Measur Soc. Sci. 10, 76–94. doi: 10.2458/v10i2.23785

Sato, T., Hidaka, T., and Fukuda, M. (2009). “Depicting the dynamics of
living the life: The trajectory equifinality model,” in Dynamic process methodology
in the social and developmental sciences, eds. J. Valsiner, P. C. M. Molenaar,
M. C. D. P. Lyra, and N. Chaudhary (New York, NY: Springer US), 217–240.
doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-95922-1_10

Thurstone, L. L. (1928). Attitudes can be measured. Am. J. Sociol. 33, 529–554.
doi: 10.1086/214483
Toomela, A. (2008). Variables in psychology: a critique of quantitative psychology.
Integr. Psychol. Behav. Sci. 42, 245–265. doi: 10.1007/s12124-008-9059-6
Toomela, A. (2010). “Modern mainstream psychology is the best? Noncumulative,
historically blind, fragmented, atheoretical,” in Methodological thinking in psychology:
60 years gone astray? eds. A. Toomela and J. Valsiner (Charlotte: Information Age
Publishers), 1–26.

Scholz, J. (2024). Agential realism as an alternative philosophy of
science perspective for quantitative psychology. Front. Psychol. 15:1410047.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1410047
Schrödinger, E. (1964). What is life? Reprinted in: What is life? With Mind and Matter
and Autobiographical Sketches. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Toomela, A., and Valsiner, J. (2010). Methodological Thinking in Psychology : 60
Years Gone Astray? Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing.

Schwager, K. W. (1991). The representational theory of measurement: an
assessment. Psychol. Bull. 110, 618–626. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.110.3.618

Torgerson, W. S. (1958). Theory and Methods of Scaling. New York, NY: Wiley.
Tourangeau, R., Rips, L. J., and Rasinski, K. (2000). The Psychology of Survey
Response. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511819322

Schwartz, C. E., and Rapkin, B. D. (2004). Reconsidering the psychometrics of
quality of life assessment in light of response shift and appraisal. Health Qual. Life
Outcomes 2:16. doi: 10.1186/1477-7525-2-16

Trendler, G. (2009). Measurement theory, psychology and the revolution that
cannot happen. Theory Psychol. 19, 579–599. doi: 10.1177/0959354309341926

Sechrest, L., McKnight, P., and McKnight, K. (1996). Calibration of
measures for psychotherapy outcome studies. Am. Psychol. 51, 1065–71.
doi: 10.1037/0003-066X.51.10.1065

Truijens, F. L. (2017). Do the numbers speak for themselves? A critical analysis of
procedural objectivity in psychotherapeutic efficacy research. Synthese 194, 4721–4740.
doi: 10.1007/s11229-016-1188-8

Shweder, R. A. (1977). Likeness and likelihood in everyday thought:
magical thinking in judgments about personality. Curr. Anthropol. 18, 637–658.
doi: 10.1086/201974

Truijens, F. L., Cornelis, S., Desmet, M., De Smet, M. M., and Meganck, R. (2019a).
Validity beyond measurement: why psychometric validity is Insufficient for valid
psychotherapy research. Front. Psychol. 10:532. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00532

Shweder, R. A., and D’Andrade, R. G. (1980). “The systematic distortion hypothesis,”
in Fallible judgment in behavioral research: New directions for methodology of social and
behavioral science, ed. R. A. Shweder (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass), 37–58.

Truijens, F. L., Kimberly, V. N., Melissa, M., Mattias, D., and Meganck, R. (2022).
How questionnaires shape experienced symptoms. A qualitative case comparison study
of questionnaire administration in psychotherapy research. Qualit. Res. Psychol. 19,
806–830. doi: 10.1080/14780887.2021.1886383

Sikström, S., Pålsson Höök, A., and Kjell, O. (2023). Precise language responses
versus easy rating scales—Comparing respondents’ views with clinicians’ belief of the
respondent’s views. PLoS ONE 18:e0267995. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0267995

Truijens, F. L., Mattias, D., Eva, D. C., Horanka, U., Bram, D., and Meganck,
R. (2019b). When quantitative measures become a qualitative storybook: a
phenomenological case analysis of validity and performativity of questionnaire
administration in psychotherapy research. Qual. Res. Psychol. 19, 244–287.
doi: 10.1080/14780887.2019.1579287

Smedslund, G., Arnulf, J. K., and Smedslund, J. (2022). Is psychological science
progressing? Explained variance in PsycINFO articles during the period 1956 to 2022.
Front. Psychol. 13:1089089. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1089089
Smedslund, J. (1991). The pseudoempirical in psychology and the case for
psychologic. Psychol. Inq. 2, 325–338. doi: 10.1207/s15327965pli0204_1

Uher, J. (2013). Personality psychology: lexical approaches, assessment methods,
and trait concepts reveal only half of the story-Why it is time for a paradigm shift.
Integr. Psychol. Behav. Sci. 47, 1–55. doi: 10.1007/s12124-013-9230-6

Smedslund, J. (2004). Dialogues About a New Psychology. Chagrin Falls, OH: Taos
Inst Publications.
Smedslund, J. (2016a). Practicing
evidence-base: the bricoleur model.
doi: 10.1016/j.newideapsych.2016.06.001

Uher, J. (2015a). “Agency enabled by the psyche: explorations using the
transdisciplinary philosophy-of-science paradigm for research on individuals,” in
Constraints of agency: Explorations of theory in everyday life. Annals of Theoretical
Psychology, eds. C. W. Gruber, M. G. Clark, S. H. Klempe, and J. Valsiner (New York:
Springer International Publishing), 177–228. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-10130-9_13

psychology without an empirical
New Ideas Psychol. 43, 50–56.

Smedslund, J. (2016b). Why psychology cannot be an empirical science. Integr.
Psychol. Behav. Sci. 50, 185–195. doi: 10.1007/s12124-015-9339-x

Uher, J. (2015b). Conceiving “personality”: psychologist’s challenges and basic
fundamentals of the transdisciplinary philosophy-of-science paradigm for research on
individuals. Integr. Psychol. Behav. Sci. 49, 398–458. doi: 10.1007/s12124-014-9283-1

Smedslund, J. (2021). From statistics to trust: psychology in transition. New Ideas
Psychol. 61, 100848. doi: 10.1016/j.newideapsych.2020.100848

Uher, J. (2015c). Developing “personality” taxonomies: metatheoretical and
methodological rationales underlying selection approaches, methods of data
generation and reduction principles. Integr. Psychol. Behav. Sci. 49, 531–589.
doi: 10.1007/s12124-014-9280-4

Speelman, C. P., and McGann, M. (2020). Statements about the pervasiveness of
behavior require data about the pervasiveness of behavior. Front. Psychol. 11:594675.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.594675
Stevens, S. S. (1946). On the theory of scales of measurement. Science 103, 667–680.
doi: 10.1126/science.103.2684.677

Uher, J. (2015d). Interpreting “personality” taxonomies: why previous models
cannot capture individual-specific experiencing, behaviour, functioning and
development. Major taxonomic tasks still lay ahead. Integr. Psychol. Behav. Sci.
49, 600–655. doi: 10.1007/s12124-014-9281-3

Stevens, S. S. (1957). On the psychophysical law. Psychol. Rev. 64, 153–181.
doi: 10.1037/h0046162
Strauch, R. E. (1976). Critical look at quantitative methodology. Policy Anal.
2, 121–144.

Uher, J. (2016a). “Exploring the workings of the Psyche: Metatheoretical
and methodological foundations,” in Psychology as the science of human being:
The Yokohama Manifesto, eds. J. Valsiner, G. Marsico, N. Chaudhary, T.
Sato, and V. Dazzani (New York: Springer International Publishing), 299–324.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-21094-0_18

Strom, D. J., and Tabatadze, G. (2022). Why “measurand” Is the first
scientific word we should teach health physicists. Health Phys. 122, 607–613.
doi: 10.1097/HP.0000000000001534

Uher, J. (2016b). What is behaviour? And (when) is language behaviour? A
metatheoretical definition. J. Theory Soc. Behav. 46, 475–501. doi: 10.1111/jtsb.12104

Suppes, P., Krantz, D., Luce, D., and Tversky, A. (1989). Foundations of
Measurement, Vol. II: Geometrical, Threshold, and Probabilistic Representations. New
York, NY: Academic Press. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-425402-2.50008-9

Uher, J. (2018a). Quantitative data from rating scales: an epistemological and
methodological enquiry. Front. Psychol. 9:2599. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02599

Suppes, P., and Zinnes, J. (1963). “Basic measurement theory,” in Handbook of
Mathematical Psychology, ed. D. Luce (John Wiley and Sons).

Uher, J. (2018b). Taxonomic models of individual differences: a guide
to transdisciplinary approaches. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 373:20170171.
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2017.0171

Tabesh, M., Mirström, M., Böhme, R. A., Lasota, M., Javaherian, Y., AgbotsokaGuiter, T., et al. (2025). Question-based computational language approach outperform
ratings scale in discriminating between anxiety and depression. J. Anxiety Disord.
112:103020. doi: 10.1016/j.janxdis.2025.103020

Uher, J. (2019). Data generation methods across the empirical sciences: differences
in the study phenomena’s accessibility and the processes of data encoding. Qual. Quan.
Int. J. Methodol. 53, 221–246. doi: 10.1007/s11135-018-0744-3

Tal, E. (2017). Calibration: modelling the measurement process. Stud. History Philos.
Sci. 65, 33–45. doi: 10.1016/j.shpsa.2017.09.001

Uher, J. (2020a). Human uniqueness explored from the uniquely human
perspective: epistemological and methodological challenges. J. Theory Soc. Behav. 50,
20–24. doi: 10.1111/jtsb.12232

Tal, E. (2020). “Measurement in science,” in The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy, ed. E. N. Zalta (Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University).
Available online at: https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2020/entries/measurementscience (accessed October 21, 2023).

Uher, J. (2020b). Measurement in metrology, psychology and social sciences:
data generation traceability and numerical traceability as basic methodological
principles applicable across sciences. Qual. Quan. Int. J. Methodol. 54, 975–1004.
doi: 10.1007/s11135-020-00970-2

Teigen, K. H. (2018). The unbearable lightness of finger movements: commentary
to Doliński. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 13, 1–6. doi: 10.5964/spb.v13i2.26110

Frontiers in Psychology

34

frontiersin.org

Uher

10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1534270

Uher, J. (2021a). Problematic research practices in psychology: misconceptions
about data collection entail serious fallacies in data analysis. Theory Psychol. 31,
411–416. doi: 10.1177/09593543211014963

Valsiner, J. (2014b). Needed for cultural psychology: methodology in a new key.
Cult. Psychol. 20, 3–30. doi: 10.1177/1354067X13515941
Valsiner, J. (2017). From Methodology to Methods in Human Psychology. Cham:
Springer International Publishing. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-61064-1

Uher, J. (2021b). Psychology’s status as a science: peculiarities and intrinsic
challenges. Moving beyond its current deadlock towards conceptual integration. Integr.
Psychol. Behav. Sci. 55, 212–224. doi: 10.1007/s12124-020-09545-0

Valsiner, J., Diriwächter, R., and Sauck, C. (2005). “Diversity in unity: standard
questions and nonstandard interpretations,” in Science and medicine in dialogue, eds.
R. Bibace, J. Laird, K. Noller, and J. Valsiner (Westport, CT: Praeger-Greenwood),
289–307. doi: 10.5040/9798216011491.ch-018

Uher, J. (2021c). Psychometrics is not measurement: unraveling a fundamental
misconception in quantitative psychology and the complex network of its underlying
fallacies. J. Theor. Philos. Psychol. 41, 58–84. doi: 10.1037/teo0000176

van der Maas, H., Kan, K.-J., and Borsboom, D. (2014). Intelligence
is what the intelligence test measures. Seriously. J. Intell. 2, 12–15.
doi: 10.3390/jintelligence2010012

Uher, J. (2021d). Quantitative psychology under scrutiny: measurement requires
not result-dependent but traceable data generation. Pers. Individ. Dif. 170:110205.
doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2020.110205

van Fraassen, B. C. (2008). Scientific Representation: Paradoxes of Perspective.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. doi: 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199278220.001.0001

Uher, J. (2022a). Functions of units, scales and quantitative data: Fundamental
differences in numerical traceability between sciences. Qual. Quan. Int. J. Methodol.
56, 2519–2548. doi: 10.1007/s11135-021-01215-6

van Geert, P. (2011). The contribution of complex dynamic systems to development.
Child Dev. Perspect. 5, 273–278. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-8606.2011.00197.x

Uher, J. (2022b). Rating scales institutionalise a network of logical errors and
conceptual problems in research practices: a rigorous analysis showing ways to tackle
psychology’s crises. Front. Psychol. 13:1009893. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1009893

Vanier, A., Oort, F. J., McClimans, L., Ow, N., Gulek, B. G., Böhnke, J. R., et al.
(2021). Response shift in patient-reported outcomes: definition, theory, and a revised
model. Qual. Life Res. 30, 3309–3322. doi: 10.1007/s11136-021-02846-w

Uher, J. (2023a). What’s wrong with rating scales? Psychology’s replication and
confidence crisis cannot be solved without transparency in data generation. Soc. Person.
Psychol. Compass 17:e12740. doi: 10.1111/spc3.12740

Velleman, P. F., and Wilkinson, L. (1993). Nominal, ordinal, interval, and ratio
typologies are misleading. Am. Stat. 47, 65–72. doi: 10.1080/00031305.1993.10475938
Vessonen, E. (2017). Psychometrics versus representational theory of measurement.
Philos. Soc. Sci. 47, 330–350. doi: 10.1177/0048393117705299

Uher, J. (2023b). What are constructs? Ontological nature, epistemological
challenges, theoretical foundations and key sources of misunderstandings
and confusions. Psychol. Inquiry 34, 280–290. doi: 10.1080/1047840X.2023.
2274384

von Eye, A., and Bogat, G. A. (2006). Person-oriented and variable-oriented
research: concepts, results, and development. Merrill Palmer Q. 52, 390–420.
doi: 10.1353/mpq.2006.0032

Uher, J. (2024). “Transdisciplinarity, complexity thinking and dialectics,”
in The Routledge International Handbook of Dialectical Thinking, eds. N.
Shannon, M. Mascolo, and A. Belolutskaya (London: Routledge), 259–277.
doi: 10.4324/9781003317340-21

von Neumann, J. (1955). Mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics
[originally published as Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik in 1935].
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Uher, J., Addessi, E., and Visalberghi, E. (2013a). Contextualised behavioural
measurements of personality differences obtained in behavioural tests and social
observations in adult capuchin monkeys (Cebus apella). J. Res. Pers. 47, 427–444.
doi: 10.1016/j.jrp.2013.01.013

Vygotsky, L. S. (1962). Thought and Language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
doi: 10.1037/11193-000
Wagoner, B., and Valsiner, J. (2005). “Rating tasks in psychology: From a static
ontology to a dialogical synthesis of meaning,” in Contemporary Theorizing in
Psychology: Global Perspectives, eds. A. Gülerce, I. Hofmeister, G. Saunders, and J. Kaye
(Toronto, Canada: Captus), 197–213.

Uher, J., Arnulf, J. K., Barrett, P. T., Heene, M., Heine, J.-H., Martin, J., et al. (2025).
Psychology’s questionable research fundamentals (QRFs): key problems in quantitative
psychology and psychological measurement beyond questionable research practices
(QRPs). Front. Psychol. 16:1553028. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1553028

Watts, A. W., and Watts, M. (1996). Myth and religion. The edited transcripts.
Tuttle Publishing. Available online at: https://www.organism.earth/library/document/
not-what-should-be-but-what-is (accessed November 02, 2024).

Uher, J., and Visalberghi, E. (2016). Observations versus assessments of
personality: a five-method multi-species study reveals numerous biases in ratings
and methodological limitations of standardised assessments. J. Res. Pers. 61, 61–79.
doi: 10.1016/j.jrp.2016.02.003

Weber, M. (1949). On the Methodology of the Social Sciences. New York: Free Press.
Westen, D. (1996). A model and a method for uncovering the nomothetic from
the idiographic: an alternative to the Five-Factor Model. J. Res. Pers. 30, 400–413.
doi: 10.1006/jrpe.1996.0028

Uher, J., Werner, C. S., and Gosselt, K. (2013b). From observations of individual
behaviour to social representations of personality: developmental pathways, attribution
biases, and limitations of questionnaire methods. J. Res. Pers. 47, 647–667.
doi: 10.1016/j.jrp.2013.03.006

Wojciszke, B., and Bocian, K. (2018). Bad methods drive out good: the
curse of imagination in social psychology research. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 13, 1–6.
doi: 10.5964/spb.v13i2.26062

Valsiner, J. (1998). The Guided Mind : A Sociogenetic Approach to Personality.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Wulff, D. U., and Mata, R. (2023). Semantic embeddings reveal and address
taxonomic incommensurability in psychological measurement. Nat. Hum. Behav. 9,
944–954. doi: 10.1038/s41562-024-02089-y

Valsiner, J. (2000). Culture and Human Development. London: Sage.
doi: 10.4135/9781446217924

Wundt, W. (1896). Grundriss der Psychologie [Outlines of Psychology].
Stuttgart: Körner.

Valsiner, J. (2007). Culture in Minds and Societies: Foundations of Cultural
Psychology. New York: Sage. doi: 10.4135/9788132108504

Yildiz, T. (2025). The minds we make: a philosophical inquiry into
theory of mind and artificial intelligence. Integr. Psychol. Behav. Sci. 59:10.
doi: 10.1007/s12124-024-09876-2

Valsiner, J. (2014a). An invitation to Cultural Psychology. New York: SAGE
Publications. doi: 10.4135/9781473905986

Frontiers in Psychology

35

frontiersin.org

