1382083

research-article2025

CDPXXX10.1177/09637214251382083Wulff, MataCurrent Directions in Psychological Science

ASSOCIATION FOR

PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE

Escaping the Jingle-Jangle Jungle:
Increasing Conceptual Clarity in
Psychology Using Large Language Models
Dirk U. Wulff1,2
1

Current Directions in Psychological
Science
2026, Vol. 35(2) 59­–65
© The Author(s) 2025
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
https://doi.org/10.1177/09637214251382083
DOI:
10.1177/09637214251382083
www.psychologicalscience.org/CDPS

and Rui Mata2

Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, Germany, and 2Center for Cognitive and
Decision Sciences, Faculty of Psychology, University of Basel

Abstract
Psychology has long struggled with conceptual redundancy, particularly in the form of “jingle-jangle fallacies,” in
which different constructs share the same label or the same construct is described using different terms. This lack of
conceptual clarity has hindered cumulative knowledge and comparability across studies and subfields. We propose
that large language models can help address this issue by placing constructs into a shared semantic space, enabling the
systematic mapping of conceptual overlap and clarification of taxonomies and generating clearer construct definitions.
Although automation plays a crucial role, we argue that meaningful progress requires a coordinated, community-wide
effort, combining computational advances with expert deliberation. Our approach provides a pathway toward greater
conceptual clarity in psychology, fostering a more unified and rigorous framework for the discipline.
Keywords
taxonomic incommensurability, conceptual clarity, embeddings, large language models

Today, most of us take the periodic table of elements
for granted, yet its creation was not the result of linear,
cumulative progress. It evolved through successive
refinements, with elements systematically introduced,
reclassified, or eliminated as scientific understanding
of physical matter advanced. For example, early chemical theories proposed the element “phlogiston,” believed
to be a substance released during burning, to account
for combustion phenomena but were ultimately discarded in light of the oxygen theory. Similarly, the proposed element “newtonium,” thought to penetrate all
substances (an homage to Newton’s widespread scientific influence), was discarded when the scant supporting evidence was shown to stem from methodological
errors. To date, more proposed elements have been
discarded than the 118 elements that make up the periodic table (Fontani et al., 2014). Chemistry thus illustrates a path from hypothesizing elements to rigorously
testing and, crucially, disproving their existence.
Psychology, like chemistry, is no stranger to the
notion of “lost elements.” Diagnoses such as hysteria
and “drapetomania” were eventually abandoned after
being exposed as being rooted in sexism and racism

rather than scientific evidence (e.g., Bynum, 2000; Tasca
et al., 2012). Yet unlike chemistry, which developed
systematic methods for refining and eliminating invalid
elements, psychology continues to see unchecked
growth (e.g., Anvari et al., 2025; Bringmann et al., 2022;
Elson et al., 2023; Leising et al., 2022; Sharp et al., 2023;
Wulff & Mata, 2025). This conceptual proliferation creates practical problems for a wide range of stakeholders: Researchers struggle to select appropriate measures
given largely overlapping constructs, consortia face
difficulties integrating theory and data because of
inconsistent definitions, editors and funders lack clear
standards for assessing the novelty of proposed constructs, and professional organizations struggle to build
coherent training frameworks and unified taxonomies
(i.e., systematic classification frameworks that organize
constructs and provide shared standards for definition
and measurement). Without the conceptual pruning
Corresponding Author:
Rui Mata, Center for Cognitive and Decision Sciences, Faculty of
Psychology, University of Basel
Email: rui.mata@unibas.ch

Wulff, Mata

60

a

b

Jingle Fallacy
same construct, different measures

different constructs, same measure

Orderliness

“I do unexpected things”

Jangle Fallacy

Grit

“I can never find anything”

Conscientiousness

“I finish whatever I begin”

Figure 1. Distinction between jingle and jangle fallacies based on existing constructs and measures in personality
research. The (a) jingle fallacy refers to the use of the same construct label, “orderliness,” for different measures
(typically a collection of items), here exemplified by the statements “I do unexpected things” and “I can never find
anything.” Although both measures are labeled “orderliness,” they may capture distinct aspects of behavior, such
as spontaneity versus orderliness per se. The (b) jangle fallacy occurs when different construct labels, “grit” and
“conscientiousness,” are used for the same underlying measure (typically a collection of items), here exemplified
by the statement “I finish whatever I begin.”

that supports cumulative progress, psychology risks
being a discipline crowded with redundant or illdefined elements.
In this article, we discuss how psychology can profit
from recent methodological advances to address these
issues. Specifically, we argue that large language models can help provide a systematic and scalable approach
for detecting and resolving conceptual redundancies
that have plagued the field. We first outline the problem
of jingle-jangle fallacies in psychology. We then introduce a general computational approach and discuss
technical considerations, practical issues, and limitations. Last, we discuss the broader research landscape
necessary for implementing these solutions effectively
and equitably.

Welcome to the Jingle-Jangle Jungle
The problem of lack of conceptual clarity in the form
of a clear mapping between constructs and operationalizations or measures has long been acknowledged in
psychology and discussed under the banner of socalled jingle-jangle fallacies, that is, two types of conceptual confusion that arise in psychological research.
The jingle fallacy occurs when two (or more) measures
are mistakenly labeled with the same construct label,
leading researchers to assume that they are equivalent
when, in fact, they capture distinct phenomena (Aikins,
1902; see Fig. 1a). Conversely, the jangle fallacy involves
using different construct labels to describe the same
measure, giving the false impression that these construct labels represent unique constructs (Kelley, 1927;
see Fig. 1b).

Unfortunately, recent evidence suggests that conceptual ambiguity is worsening in psychology, with a growing proliferation of both constructs and measures over
the past decades. Elson et al. (2023) analyzed the American Psychological Association’s PsycTests database and
found more than 38,000 constructs and 43,000 measures, most of which are used only infrequently. This
pattern contributes to fragmentation rather than standardization and highlights substantial potential for conceptual and measurement overlap in the field.
Ambiguities in how psychological constructs map
onto their measures can arise when different research
traditions adopt different methods and connect theories to observations in incompatible ways—a problem
philosophers call “taxonomic incommensurability”
(Oberheim & Hoyningen-Huene, 2018). This fragmentation is compounded by a “division of linguistic labor,”
as key terms take on divergent meanings across subfields, impeding cumulative progress (Putnam, 1973).
Although such issues are widely recognized, psychology has lacked scalable tools to quantify and manage
conceptual engineering—the systematic refinement of
conceptual frameworks (Chalmers, 2020). Past
approaches involved extensive construct validation, for
example, by conducting prediction studies to assess
the differential predictive validity of various constructs
(Cronbach & Meehl, 1955) or by triangulating across
multiple constructs using costly multitrait, multimethod
designs to establish convergent and discriminant validity (Campbell & Fiske, 1959). However, because such
studies are resource intensive, they have been rare and
typically focus on a narrow subset of constructs and
measures, leaving considerable gaps unresolved.

Current Directions in Psychological Science 35(2)
Today, large language models can help automate parts
of this process by mapping constructs into shared
semantic spaces that empirically map relationships
between all extant constructs in a relatively easy way,
enabling the detection and resolution of conceptual
redundancies at scale.

Increasing Conceptual Clarity With
Large Language Models
Large language models provide us with semantic
embeddings—high-dimensional representations of
words or phrases that capture meaning on the basis of
contextual relationships—offering a promising approach
to clarifying the connections between psychological
constructs. Earlier studies have demonstrated the utility
of semantic embeddings for mapping and differentiating constructs in psychology (e.g., Larsen & Bong, 2016;
Rosenbusch et al., 2020). However, recent advances
have dramatically enhanced the capacity of these models, making them powerful tools for addressing taxonomic incommensurability (e.g., Hussain et al., 2024;
Wulff & Mata, 2025).
Recently, Wulff and Mata (2025) leveraged semantic
embeddings of item, scale, and labels from a large set
of personality measures to model the semantic relationships between thousands of psychometric items and
hundreds of scales and labels. Their analysis demonstrated that semantic embeddings could effectively predict empirical associations between items and scales
while also automatically detecting jingle-jangle fallacies
in construct assignments. Additionally, they introduced
methods to refine psychological taxonomies by systematically reducing redundancy through reassigning labels
to scales. In one approach, they proposed a streamlined
version of personality measures with 75% fewer hypothesized constructs, highlighting the potential of semantic
embeddings to create more parsimonious and coherent
taxonomies in psychology.
Although the work discussed above focuses on personality psychology, we argue that this approach is
broadly applicable across the discipline. Advancing the
field as a whole will require extending such methods
to other psychological domains, in which similar issues
of conceptual ambiguity and redundancy persist. We
outline three main classes of applications in which large
language models can be used to promote conceptual
clarity.
Figure 2 illustrates an approach in which psychological measures and constructs are placed into a common semantic space, allowing researchers to apply
many of the same analytical strategies long familiar in
psychology—such as clustering or dimensionality
reduction—to semantic embeddings rather than purely

61
to empirical associations. One important class of applications concerns mapping the relations between existing measures and constructs. For example, clustering
allows researchers to group semantically similar measures and constructs to detect redundancies, identify
overlapping concepts, and uncover latent relationships
between different measures. Thus, researchers can systematically examine the relations between measures
and constructs using strategies envisioned in earlier
work on construct validation (e.g., Cronbach & Meehl,
1955), but now at a greater scale and with greater
efficiency. This provides a new basis for making more
precise and transparent decisions about measurement
strategies, improving conceptual clarity in psychology.
A second class of applications involves clarifying
existing taxonomies, for example, by using semantic
embeddings to systematically reassign construct labels
on the basis of their semantic similarity to established
or novel concepts. This method may be particularly
useful for standardizing terminology across studies or
even subfields, ensuring greater consistency and reproducibility in psychological research. By aligning construct labels with empirical and theoretical relationships,
researchers can reduce ambiguity, resolve jingle-jangle
fallacies, and promote clearer communication within
the field. Crucially, instead of relying on arbitrary naming conventions, this approach offers a replicable, datadriven method for refining psychological taxonomies.
Last, a third class of applications involves generating
new measures or constructs. Although this may appear
counterintuitive to the goal of reducing conceptual proliferation, generative language models can support clarity in at least two ways. First, they can assist in creating
psychometric items that are semantically well aligned
with existing constructs, enhancing internal consistency
and content coverage without resorting to loosely
related or conceptually distant alternatives. Second,
they can help identify gaps in the conceptual landscape, guiding the development of constructs that
address blind spots rather than duplicating existing
ideas. Crucially, because these generative outputs can
be situated within the same semantic space used for
mapping and clarification, they can be evaluated with
comparable rigor—ensuring that new contributions
enhance, rather than dilute, conceptual clarity.

Technical Considerations, Practical
Issues, and Limitations
Although the mapping, clarifying, and generating applications illustrated in Figure 2 share a common foundation, their implementation raises technical considerations.
First, different applications require distinct technical uses
of large language models. Most of the applications

Wulff, Mata

62

Shared
semantic
space

Construct
(Iabel or definition)

Measure

(generated using
an embedding
model; stylized)

(Item or scale)

Mapping

Clarifying

Generating

Clustering: Identifying groups of
measures (or constructs)

Fallacy identification: Finding
potential jingle-jangle fallacies

Parallel construction: Generating
semantic variations

Jingle fallacy

Jangle
fallacy

Cluster i

Measure /
construct
variation

Cluster j

Dimensionality reduction:
Identifying underlying dimensions

Principal
component

Relabeling: Assigning measures to
constructs and construct pruning

Expansion: Generating potentially
novel measures or constructs

Novel
measures /
constructs

Reassigned
measures

Pruned
constructs
Figure 2. General computational approach to enhancing conceptual clarity in psychology. Constructs (e.g., labels or
definitions) and measures (e.g., items or scales) from the psychological literature are embedded into a shared semantic
space (top cube). In this example, we use stylized data generated from an embedding model and apply different analytical techniques. This semantic space serves as the foundation for three classes of applications illustrated in the lower part
of the figure: mapping, clarifying, and generating. Mapping: Clustering groups measures to uncover the latent structure
and identify redundancy (colors indicate the cluster to which each measure belongs); dimensionality reduction highlights the key dimensions of variation (the color of each measure indicates its factor loading on a principal component).
Clarifying: Fallacy detection identifies conceptual overlap through the detection of jingle fallacies (colored lines link
the same construct label to two different measures) and jangle fallacies (colored lines connect two distinct construct
labels to two similar measures); relabeling reassigns or relabels measures and prunes redundant constructs to refine the
taxonomy structure (crosses represent pruned constructs). Generating: Parallel construction uses a generative model
to produce semantically aligned variations of existing measures; expansion represents the use of a generative model to
create new items or constructs that address conceptual gaps.

Current Directions in Psychological Science 35(2)

63

Table 1. Example Strategies by Stakeholder
Stakeholder

Mapping

Clarifying

Generating

Researchers

Cluster measures to detect semantic
overlap or use dimensionality
reduction to inform measure
selection for primary studies.
Compare taxonomies across
research areas to identify
conceptual overlaps or silos to
improve collaboration efforts.
Evaluate semantic similarity of
new constructs or measures
to existing literature to assess
novelty.

Detect and remove jingle-jangle
fallacies in construct measure
assignments when planning a
study or interpreting results.
Harmonize terminology across
subfields by realigning measures
and constructs.

Use embeddings to continuously
track and visualize construct
proliferation and clustering
trends in the field.

Standardize definitions and update
taxonomies by consolidating
semantically similar entries in
psychological dictionaries.

Use generative models to create
new items for studies involving
multiple measurement
occasions.
Develop domain-specific
measurement frameworks
to fill gaps in emerging or
interdisciplinary areas.
Encourage development of
measures or constructs in special
issues or calls in semantically
underrepresented areas to
promote innovation and
conceptual balance.
Support tools for generating
candidate constructs or
organizing frameworks to guide
future research.

Consortia

Editors and
funders

Professional
organizations

Flag ambiguous or redundant
measures during review using
automated semantic checks
and request clarification from
authors.

discussed above concerning mapping and clarification
tasks involve obtaining embeddings from large language
models (i.e., feature extraction) and using these embeddings to locate constructs in high-dimensional semantic
spaces (e.g., Abdurahman et al., 2024; Hommel & Arslan,
2024; Wulff & Mata, 2025). One technical question with
this approach is the type of embeddings to be used:
General-purpose embeddings capture broad semantic
knowledge, whereas embeddings obtained from training
models to specific tasks (fine-tuning) offer task-specific
sensitivity but may risk reduced generalizability. Other
applications require different models or setups that
involve generating new items or constructs through
prompting (i.e., text generation; Götz et al., 2024). The
different models and approaches may not always provide
equivalent results; thus, future work will need to assess
which are most suitable for different applications (Achille
et al., 2019; Demircan et al., 2024). Integrating these different uses will be crucial to creating productive pipelines that integrate both generation and evaluation to
avoid unwarranted proliferation of measures or constructs (Laverghetta et al., 2024).
There are important practical issues, particularly
given the complex evolving landscape of models,
approaches, and stakeholders. Table 1 outlines examples of potential uses—some of which are already
accessible through tutorials (Wulff et al., 2024) or online
applications (Hommel & Arslan, 2024; Rosenbusch
et al., 2020)—by different stakeholders. Improving this
potential, however, depends on three conditions. First,
adequate infrastructure is required. Although large language models are widely available as chatbots, the type

of academic applications discussed demand access to
resources that are not currently available to all, particularly those involving open-weight models (the internal
parameters of which are publicly available) that require
dedicated infrastructure to support data sovereignty,
transparency, and reproducibility (Wulff et al., 2024).
Second, researchers need appropriate training. Although
some uses can be implemented via online tools, more
advanced uses require additional efforts, including
hands-on workshops and integration into academic curricula. Third, professional organizations must play a
role in supporting adoption, for example, by creating
dedicated task forces to deliberate (and communicate)
on best practices for integrating these tools into both
theoretical development and applied work.
There are a number of limitations. First, semantically similar constructs should not always be treated
as necessarily identical. For example, psychology has
a tradition of distinguishing between subjective experience and objective states (e.g., subjective stress vs.
cortisol stress response) that may be semantically
related but potentially theoretically distinct. The extent
to which such cases abound and are (or are not) captured by large language models remains to be assessed.
Second, relatedly, most work has focused on textbased measures, such as personality items and selfreports, which align well with language-based models
(e.g., Hommel & Arslan, 2024; Wulff & Mata, 2025) but
represent only a small portion of measurement in psychology. Recent successes in predicting behavioral
outcomes using large language models suggest potential for extending these methods to task-based

Wulff, Mata

64
measures (Binz et al., 2025), but current limitations in
cross-measure integration must be overcome to support a comprehensive map of constructs and promote
conceptual clarity across psychology.

Moving Forward: Large Language
Models Should Inform, Not Replace,
Expert Debate
Large language models do not offer a value-neutral
vision of the conceptual landscape of psychology
because their outputs inevitably reflect the biases of
their training data and regimes; thus, one cannot propose using large language models to enforce conceptual uniformity from a neutral perspective. Furthermore,
construct diversity can reflect genuine differences in
theoretical orientation or measurement aims that serve
divergent but legitimate purposes across research
communities. Consequently, efforts to consolidate constructs must recognize the epistemic value of pluralism
(e.g., Hochstein, 2016; Iliescu et al., 2024) and keep
in mind that decisions about constructs that are
retained, merged, or eliminated are rarely neutral but
shaped by the priorities of specific interest groups and
sociohistorical norms (e.g., Danziger, 2013). These
considerations suggest that the use of automated
methods can at best be thought of as facilitating the
systematic evaluation of the construct landscape and
supporting transparent negotiation among stakeholders through structured dialogue. We believe this aligns
well with past calls for greater conceptual clarity,
which have emphasized the role of expert coordination and shared infrastructure to address construct
proliferation (e.g., Anvari et al., 2025; Bringmann
et al., 2022; Sharp et al., 2023).
When discussing the idea of conceptual engineering,
Chalmers (2020) argued that aspects of concept design
and evaluation, such as those we introduced above
regarding the overlap of different constructs, are relatively tractable. However, widespread concept implementation—that is, actual change in the use of concepts
(e.g., consistent adoption of a specific measure to capture a construct)—is a more difficult social project. The
field of psychology has seen recent developments that
leave us optimistic, including the growing adoption of
reporting standards, preregistration, and related
reforms. Of course, any proposal that gives researchers,
editors, and professional organizations greater influence over the use of terms and measures may conflict
with ideals of diversity and freedom. We hope that our
proposal, when embedded within a broader framework
of collaborative and critically reflexive debate, can help
balance the goals of coherence and diversity in psychology, with large language models serving as tools to
support—not dictate—this process.

Conclusion
Large language models offer scalable tools for detecting, clarifying, and generating psychological constructs within a shared semantic space. As a form of
conceptual engineering, this approach can inform
expert deliberation and support collaborative refinement of conceptual landscapes. Although not a substitute for shared deliberation, these tools provide a
principled means for advancing conceptual clarity in
psychology.
Recommended Reading
Bringmann, L. F., Elmer, T., & Eronen, M. I. (2022). (See
References). Makes a conceptual argument for the importance of conceptual clarification in psychology.
Elson, M., Hussey, I., Alsalti, T., & Arslan, R. C. (2023). (See
References). Provides an empirical overview of the proliferation of constructs and measures in psychology.
Hussain, Z., Binz, M., Mata, R., & Wulff, D. U. (2024). (See
References). Introduces large language models as tools
for psychological research, including how these models
can be used for mapping, clarifying, and generating goals
in psychology.
Wulff, D. U., & Mata, R. (2025). (See References). Offers a
solution to identifying and resolving jingle-jangle fallacies
on the basis of semantic embeddings obtained from large
language models.

Transparency
Action Editor: Wiebke Bleidorn
Editor: June Gruber
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest
with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
This work was supported by Swiss National Science
Foundation Grants 197315 (to D. U. Wulff) and 204700 (to
R. Mata).

ORCID iDs
Dirk U. Wulff
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4008-8022
Rui Mata
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1679-906X

Acknowledgments
We thank Loreen Tisdall, Maximilian Theisen, Jutta Mata, and
Ruben Arslan for helpful comments on the manuscript and
Laura Wiles for editing the manuscript.

References
Abdurahman, S., Vu, H., Zou, W., Ungar, L., & Bhatia, S.
(2024). A deep learning approach to personality assessment: Generalizing across items and expanding the
reach of survey-based research. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 26(2), 312–331. https://doi.org/
10.1037/pspp0000480

Current Directions in Psychological Science 35(2)
Achille, A., Lam, M., Tewari, R., Ravichandran, A., Maji, S.,
Fowlkes, C., Soatto, S., & Perona, P. (2019). Task2vec:
Task embedding for meta-learning. arXiv. https://doi.org/
10.48550/arXiv.1902.03545
Aikins, H. A. (1902). The principles of logic. Henry Holt and
Company.
Anvari, F., Alsalti, T., Oehler, L. A., Hussey, I., Elson, M., &
Arslan, R. C. (2025). Defragmenting psychology. Nature
Human Behaviour, 9, 836–839.
Binz, M., Akata, E., Bethge, M., Brändle, F., Callaway, F.,
Coda-Forno, J., Dayan, P., Demircan, C., Eckstein, M. K.,
Élterö, N., Griffiths, T. L., Haridi, S., Jagadish, A. K., Ji-An, L.,
Kipnis, A., Kumar, S., Ludwig, T., Mathony, M., Mattar,
M., . . . Schulz, E. (2024). Centaur: A foundation model
of human cognition. arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv
.2410.20268
Bringmann, L. F., Elmer, T., & Eronen, M. I. (2022). Back to basics:
The importance of conceptual clarification in psychological
science. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 31,
340–346. https://doi.org/10.1177/09637214221096485
Bynum, B. (2000). Discarded diagnoses. The Lancet, 356(9241),
1615. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(05)74468-8
Campbell, D. T., & Fiske, D. W. (1959). Convergent and
discriminant validation by the multitrait–multimethod
matrix. Psychological Bulletin, 56(2), 81–105. https://doi
.org/10.1037/h0046016
Chalmers, D. J. (2020). What is conceptual engineering and
what should it be? Inquiry, 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1080/
0020174X.2020.1817141
Cronbach, L. J., & Meehl, P. E. (1955). Construct validity
in psychological tests. Psychological Bulletin, 52(4),
281–302. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0040957
Danziger, K. (2013). Psychology and its history. Theory &
Psychology, 23(6), 829–839. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0959354313502746
Demircan, C., Saanum, T., Jagadish, A. K., Binz, M., & Schulz, E.
(2024). Sparse autoencoders reveal temporal difference
learning in large language models. arXiv. https://doi.org/
10.48550/arXiv.2410.01280
Elson, M., Hussey, I., Alsalti, T., & Arslan, R .C. (2023).
Psychological measures aren’t toothbrushes.
Communications Psychology, 1, Article 25. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s44271-023-00026-9
Fontani, M., Costa, M., & Orna, M. V. (2014). Lost elements:
The periodic table’s shadow side. Oxford University
Press.
Götz, F. M., Maertens, R., Loomba, S., & van der Linden, S.
(2024). Let the algorithm speak: How to use neural networks for automatic item generation in psychological scale
development. Psychological Methods, 29(3), 494–518.
Hochstein, E. (2016). Categorizing the mental. The Philosophical
Quarterly, 66(265), 745–759. https://doi.org/10.1093/pq/
pqw001
Hommel, B. E., & Arslan, R. C. (2024). Language models
accurately infer correlations between psychological items

65
and scales from text alone. OSF. https://doi.org/10.31234/
osf.io/kjuce
Hussain, Z., Binz, M., Mata, R., & Wulff, D. U. (2024). A tutorial on open-source large language models for behavioral
science. Behavior Research Methods, 56(8), 8214–8237.
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-024-02455-8
Iliescu, D., Greiff, S., Ziegler, M., Nye, C., Geisinger, K.,
Sellbom, M., Samuel, D., & Saklofske, D. (2024).
Proliferation of measures contributes to advancing psychological science. Communications Psychology, 2,
Article 19. https://doi.org/10.1038/s44271-024-00065-w
Kelley, T. L. (1927). Interpretation of educational measurements. World Book.
Larsen, K. R., & Bong, C. H. (2016). A tool for addressing
construct identity in literature reviews and meta-analyses.
MIS Quarterly, 40(3), 529–551. https://doi.org/10.25300/
MISQ/2016/40.3.01
Laverghetta, A., Jr., Luchini, S., Linell, A., Reiter-Palmon, R., &
Beaty, R. (2024). The creative psychometric item generator:
A framework for item generation and validation using large
language models. arXiv. https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.00202
Leising, D., Thielmann, I., Glöckner, A., Gärtner, A., &
Schönbrodt, F. (2022). Ten steps toward a better personality science—How quality may be rewarded more in
research evaluation. Personality Science, 3, Article e6029.
https://doi.org/10.5964/ps.6029
Oberheim, E., & Hoyningen-Huene, P. (2018). The incommensurability of scientific theories. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.),
The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy (Fall 2018 ed.).
Stanford University. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/
fall2018/entries/incommensurability
Putnam, H. (1973). Meaning and reference. The Journal of
Philosophy, 70(19), 699–711. https://doi.org/10.2307/
2025079
Rosenbusch, H., Wanders, F., & Pit, I. L. (2020). The semantic
scale network: An online tool to detect semantic overlap of psychological scales and prevent scale redundancies. Psychological Methods, 25(3), 380–392. https://doi
.org/10.1037/met0000244
Sharp, C., Kaplan, R. M., & Strauman, T. J. (2023). The
use of ontologies to accelerate the behavioral sciences: Promises and challenges. Current Directions
in Psychological Science, 32(5), 418-426. https://doi
.org/10.1177/09637214231183917
Tasca, C., Rapetti, M., Carta, M. G., & Fadda, B. (2012). Women
and hysteria in the history of mental health. Clinical
Practice & Epidemiology in Mental Health, 8(1), 110–119.
https://doi.org/10.2174/1745017901208010110
Wulff, D. U., Hussain, Z., & Mata, R. (2024). The behavioral
and social sciences need open LLMs. OSF. https://doi.org/
https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/ybvzs
Wulff, D. U., & Mata, R. (2025). Semantic embeddings reveal
and address taxonomic incommensurability in psychological measurement. Nature Human Behaviour. 9, 944–954.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-024-02089-y

