DISTRIBUTIONAL STRUCTURE

1. DOES LANGUAGE HAVE A DISTRIBUTIONAL STRUCTURE?

For the purposes of the present discussion, the term structure will be used in
the following non-rigorous sense: A set of phonemes or a set of data is
structured in respect to some feature, to the extent that we can form in terms
of that feature some organized system of statements which describes the
members of the set and their interrelations (at least up to some limit of
complexity). In this sense, language can be structured in respect to various
independent features. And whether it is structured (to more than a trivial
extent) in respect to, say, regular historical change, social intercourse,
meaning, or distribution - or to what extent it is structured in any of these
respects - is a matter decidable by investigation. Here we will discuss how
each language can be described in terms of a distributional structure, i.e. in
terms of the occurrence of parts (ultimately sounds) relative to other parts,
and how this description is complete without intrusion of other features such
as history or meaning. It goes without saying that other studies oflanguage historical, psychological, etc. - are also possible, both in relation to distributional structure and independently of it.
The distribution of an element will be understood as the sum of all its
environments. An environment of an element A is an existing array of its
co-occurrents, i.e. the other elements, each in a particular position, with which
A occurs to yield an utterance. A's co-occurrents in a particular position are
called its selection for that position.
1.1. Possibilities of Structure for the Distributional Facts

To see that there can be a distributional structure we note the following:
First, the parts of a language do not occur arbitrarily relative to each other:
each element occurs in certain positions relative to certain other elements.
The perennial man in the street believes that when he speaks he freely puts
together whatever elements have the meanings he intends; but he does so
only by choosing members of those classes that regularly occur together, and
in the order in which these classes occur.
Second, the restricted distribution of classes persists for all their occurWord 10, No. 2-3 (1954), 146-62.

3

4

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

rences; the restrictions are not disregarded arbitrarily, e.g. for semantic
needs. Some logicians, for example, have considered that an exact distributional description of natural languages is impossible because of their
inherent vagueness. This is not quite the case. All elements in a language can
be grouped into classes whose relative occurrence can be stated exactly.
However, for the occurrence of a particular member of one class relative to
a particular member of another class it would be necessary to speak in terms
of probability, based on the frequency of that occurrence in a sample.
Third, it is possible to state the occurrence of any element relative to any
other element, to the degree of exactness indicated above, so that distributional statements can cover all the material of a language, without
requiring support from other types of information. At various times it has
been thought that one could only state the normative rules of grammar (e.g.
because colloquial departures from these were irregular), or the rules for a
standard dialect but not for 'substandard' speech or slang; or that distributional statements had to be amplified by historical derivation (e.g.
because the earlier form of the language was somehow more regular).
However, in all dialects studied it has been possible to find elements having
regularities of occurrence; and while historical derivation can be studied
both independently and in relation to the distribution of elements 1, it is
always also possible to state the relative occurrence of elements without
reference to their history (Le. 'descriptively').
Fourth, the restrictions on relative occurrence of each element are described
most simply by a network of interrelated statements, certain of them being put
in terms of the results of certain others, rather than by a simple measurement
of the total restriction on each element separately. Some engineers and mathematicians (as also phoneticians and experimental psychologists) who have
become interested in language have sought a direct formulation of the total
restrictions on occurrence for each element, say for each sound. 2 This would
yield an expression for how the occurrences of each element depart from
equiprobability, and so would give a complete description of the occurrences
of elements in the language. Now it is of course possible to enumerate the
relative occurrences of a finite set of elements in finitely long utterances; but
direct enumeration is of little interest because it yields no simple description
of the over-all occurrences of elements, and because it does not order the
restrictions in such a way that the larger restrictions get stated before the
smaller ones. In contrast with this, it is possible to describe the occurrence
of each element indirectly, by successive groupings into sets, in such a way
that the total statements about the groupings of elements into sets and the
relative occurrence ofthe sets are fewer and simpler than the total statements
about the relative occurrence of each element directly.

DISTRIBUTIONAL STRUCTURE

5

We obtain then an ordered set of statements in terms of certain constructs
- the sets at successive levels. Since the ordering of statements can be
arranged so that the earlier ones will deal with the more inclusive sets, we
can stop the process of setting up these statements at any convenient point,
and accept the unfinished list of statements as an approximation to the
distributional facts - knowing that the subsequent statements will only make
subsidiary corrections to the earlier statements. (This is not the case for the
direct enumeration of restrictions, where the restrictions to be enumerated
after a given point may be greater than those enumerated before.)
In view of this we may say that there is not only a body of facts about the
relative occurrence of elements in a language, but also a structure of relative
occurrence (i.e. of distribution). Hence the investigation of a language entails
not only the empirical discovery of what are its irreducible elements and their
relative occurrence, but also the mathematical search for a simple set of
ordered statements that will express the empirical facts. 3 It may turn out that
several systems of statements are equally adequate, for example several
phonemic solutions for a particular language (or only, say, for the long
vowels of a language). It may also be that different systems are simpler under
different conditions. For example, one system may be adequate in terms of
successive segments of sound (with at most stress and tone abstracted), while
another system may be simpler if we admit the analysis of the sounds into
simultaneous components of varying lengths. Or one system of stating
distribution in respect to near neighbors (the usual environment for phonemic solutions) may be simple by itself, but if we are to imbed it in other
statements about farther neighbors we may find that when we choose a
modified system the statements covering the imbedding are simpler (i.e. a
different phonemic solution may be more convenient for use in statements
about morphemes). If the distributional structure is to be used as part of a
description of speech, of linguistic behavior, then we will of course accept
only such structures as retain a passably simple relation to the phonetic
features. But for some other purpose, such as transmission or systemic
analysis, phonetic complexity may be no serious objection. In any case, there
is no harm in all this non-uniqueness 4, since each system can be mapped onto
the others, so long as any special conditions are explicit and measurable.
Various questions are raised by the fact that there can be more than one
(non-trivial) structural statement for a given language. Can we say whether a
particular item of structural analysis contributes to the simplicity of the
system? It may be possible to do this: For example, if a given analysis
involves a particular classification of elements (say, verbs), we may try some
variation on this classification (say, by subdivision into transitive and
intransitive - distributionally defined) and see whether the resulting analysis

6

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

is simpler or not. Can we say what is invariant under all the possible distributional structures for a given body of data? For example, for all the
phonemic solutions in a given language, there remains constant the minimal
network of phonemically distinct utterance-pairs in terms of which we can
distinguish every phonemically distinct utterance.
The various structural systems considered here all have this in common,
that they list items and their occurrences. There is at least one other type of
structural statement which is essentially distributional but couched in
different terms. This is the style which describes one linguistic form as being
derived by some process (operation) from another. The item style says: Form
A includes elements e +f while form B includes elements e + g; and thus it
describes all forms as combinations of elements. The process style says:
Form A is derived from B by changingfinto g; and thus it describes most
forms as derived from certain base forms. The combinatorial or item style,
which has a more algebraic form, is more parsimonious and representative
for much of linguistic data. The process style, which is more similar to
historical statements, is useful in certain situations, especially in compact
morphophonemics. 5 Both styles are based solely on the relative occurrence
of parts, and are therefore distributional.
1.2. Reality of the Structure

Some question has been raised as to the reality of this structure. Does it
really exist, or is it just a mathematical creation of the investigator's?
Skirting the philosophical difficulties of this problem, we should in any case
realize that there are two quite different questions here.
One: Does the structure really exist in the language? The answer is yes, as
much as any scientific structure really obtains in the data which it describes:
the scientific structure states a network of relations, and these relations really
hold in the data investigated. 6
Two: Does the structure really exist in the speakers? Here we are faced
with a question of fact, which is not directly or fully investigated in the
process of determining the distributional structure. Clearly, certain behaviors
of the speakers indicate perception along the lines of the distributional
structure: for example, the fact that while people imitate non-linguistic or
foreign-language sounds, they 'repeat' utterances of their own language 7 (i.e.
they reproduce the utterance by substituting, for the sounds they heard, the
particular corresponding variants which they habitually pronounce; hence
the heard sounds are perceived as members of correspondence sets). There
are also evidences of perception of sounds in terms of their morphophonemic
memberships. 8
A reasonable expectation is that the distributional structure should exist in

DISTRIBUTIONAL STRUCTURE

7

the speakers in the sense of reflecting their speaking habits. 9 Indeed, responses
along the lines of distributional structure can be found in experimental
psychology work.1° However, different speakers differ in the details of
distributional perception. One speaker may associate the stem of nation with
that of native, while another may not: should the morpheme analysis be
different for the two idiolects (individual dialects)? Even if we take the
speaking habits to be some kind of social summation over the behaviors (and
habits) of all the individuals, we may not find it possible to discover all these
habits except by investigating the very speech events which we had hoped to
correlate with the (independently discovered) habits.
If, as Hockett proposes, we measure the habits by the new utterances
which had not been used in the structural description, we have indeed a
possible and sensible measure; and this applies both to real productivity
(the use of elements in environments in which they had not occurred before),
and also to arbitrarily unused data (utterances which may have occurred
before but which had not been used in deriving the distributional structure).
However, even when our structure can predict new utterances, we do not
know that it always reflects a previously existing neural association in the
speakers (different from the associations which do not, at a given time,
produce new utterances). For example, before the word analyticity came to
be used (in modern logic) our data on English may have contained analytic,
synthetic, periodic, periodicity, simplicity, etc. On this basis we would have
made some statement about the distributional relation of -ic to -ity, and the
new formation of analyticity may have conformed to this statement. But this
means only that the pattern or the habit existed in the speakers at the time of
the new formation, not necessarily before: the 'habit' - the readiness to
combine these elements productively - may have developed only when the
need arose, by association of words that were partially similar as to composition and environment.
For the position of the speakers is after all similar to that of the linguist.
They have heard (and used) a great many utterances among which they
perceive partial similarities: parts which occur in various combinations with
each other. They produce new combinations of these along the lines of the
ones they have heard. The formation of new utterances in the language is
therefore based on the distributional relations - as changeably perceived by
the speakers - among the parts of the previously heard utterances. l l
Concerning any habit, i.e. any predisposition to form new combinations
along particular distributional lines rather than others, we know about its
existence in the speakers only if we have some outside evidence (such as
association tests), or if new formations of the type in question have been
formed by these speakers. The frequency of slips, new formations, etc., is

8

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

enough to make us feel that the bulk of the major structural features are
indeed reflected in speaking habits - habits which are presumably based, like
the linguist's analysis, on the distributional facts. Aside from this, all we
know about any particular language habit is the probability that new formations will be along certain distributional lines rather than others, and this
is no more than testing the success of our distributional structure in predicting
new data or formations. The particular distributional structure which best
predicts new formations will be of greatest interest from many (not all) points
of view; but this is not the same as saying that all of that structure exists in
the speakers at any particular time prior to the new formations. 12
2. DISTRIBUTION AND MEANING
2.1. Is there a Parallel 'Meaning Structure'?

While the distinction between descriptive (synchronic) structure and historical change is by now well known, the distinction between distributional
structure and meaning is not yet always clear. Meaning is not a unique property
of language, but a general characteristic of human activity. It is true that
language has a special relation to meaning, both in the sense of the classification of aspects of experience, and in the sense of communication. But
the relation is not simple. For example, we can compare the structures of
languages with the structure of the physical w.orld (e.g. the kind of phenomena that are expressed by differentiation and integration in calculus), or
with what we know about the structure of human response (e.g. association,
transference). In either case, it would be clear that the structure of one language or another does not conform in many respects to the structure of
physical nature or of human response - i.e. to the structure of objective experience from which we presumably draw our meanings. And if we consider
the individual aspects of experience, the way a person's store of meanings
grows and changes through the years while his language remains fairly
constant, or the way a person can have an idea or a feeling which he cannot
readily express in the language available to him, we see that the structure of
language does not necessarily conform to the structure of subjective experience, of the subjective world of meanings. 13
All this is not to say that there is not a great interconnection between language and meaning, in whatever sense it may be possible to use this word. But
it is not a one-to-one relation between morphological structure and anything
else. There is not even a one-to-one relation between the vocabulary and any
independent classification of meaning: We cannot say that each morpheme
or word has a single or central meaning, or even that it has a continuous or
coherent range of meanings. Accidents of sound change, homonymity,

DISTRIBUTIONAL STRUCTURE

9

borrowing, forgotten metaphors, and the like can give diverse meanings to a
number of phonemic occurrences which we have to consider as occurrences
of the same morpheme. Aside from this, if we consider the suggestion of
Kurt Goldstein 14 that there are two separate uses and meanings of language - the concrete (e.g. by certain brain-injured patients) and the abstractit would follow that the same grammatical structure and much the same
vocabulary can carry quite different types of speaking activity.
The correlation between language and meaning is much greater when we
consider connected discourse. To the extent that formal (distributional)
structure can be discovered in discourse, it correlates in some way with the
substance of what is being said; this is especially evident in stylized scientific
discourse (e.g. reports on experimental work) and above all in the formal
discourses (proofs) of mathematics and logic. However, this is not the same
thing as saying that the distributional structure of language (phonology,
morphology, and at most a small amount of discourse structure) conforms in
some one-to-one way with some independently discoverable structure of
meaning. If one wishes to speak of language as existing in some sense on
two planes - of form and of meaning - we can at least say that the structures
of the two are not identical, though they will be found similar in various
respects.
2.2. Are Morphemes determined by Meaning?

Since there is no independently known structure of meanings which exactly
parallels linguistic structure, we cannot mix distributional investigations
with occasional assists from meaning whenever the going is hard. For example, if the morphemic composition of a word is not easily determined, we
cannot decide the matter by seeing what are the component meanings of the
word and assigning one morpheme to each: Do persist, person contain one
morpheme each or two? In terms of meaning it would be difficult to decide,
and the decision would not necessarily fit into any resulting structure. In
terms of distribution we have consist, resist, pertain, contain, retain, etc.
(related in phonemic composition and in sentence environment), but no such
set for person; hence we take persist as two morphemes, person as one.
Although rough indications of meaning are often used heuristically to
guess at the morphemes of a word or utterance, the decision as to morphemic
composition is always based on a check of what sections of that word or
utterance are substitutable in a structured (patterned) way in that environment; as roughly indicated in the example above.
Where the meanings (in most cases, the translations) are not immediately
suggestive, the analysis is laboriously distributional without any heuristic
aids to test. For example in the Cherokee verb prefixes, we find scores of

10

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

forms 15, e.g. /agwal.:)n!Jr:)gi/ 'I started', /sd:)gadhenoha/ 'I and another are
searching for you', /sd:)gadhenoh:)gi/ 'I searched for you two'. These have
obviously personal. reference, but it is impossible to separate out a small set
of phonemic segments which will mean 'I' or 'I as subject', 'I as object', etc.
It is nevertheless possible to discover the morphemes distributionally. First
we identify the words by their distributional relation to the rest of the
sentence. We find that certain words with many different stems and a few
different prefixes have certain types of environment in common. For example
/zin:)gali'a/ 'I am cleaning' and /agiyoseha/ 'I am hungry' occur in certain
environments in which /uniyoseha/ 'they are hungry' does not occur. We take
a set of words each with different stems but which have the same environment in the sense referred to above. We will assume that the sameness in this
feature of the environment correlates with some morphemic part that is the
same in all these words (and is obviously not the stem).16 This means that the
different prefixes of these words contain alternants of the same morpheme;
and we try to state a morphophonemic relation between /z/, /(a)g/, etc.,
giving the environing conditions (in phonemic rather than morphemic terms
if possible) in which each alternant occurs: we write the morpheme {z} and
translate it 'I'. Another set, containing e.g. /ozin:)galira/ 'I and others are
cleaning', /ogiyoseha/ 'I and others are hungry', would thus be analyzed
(in the same manner, but with the aid of {z}) as containing two morphemes,
{o} 'others' and {z} 'I'. If we now turn to the set containing /osdin:)galira/ 'I
and another are cleaning', /oginiyoseha/ 'I and another are hungry', etc.,
our morphophonemic knowledge about {z} enables us to separate out /d,/
/nl etc. as alternants of some third morpheme {n}, with undetermined
meaning. In /iginiyoseha/ 'you and I are hungry' our known morphophonemics enables us to analyze the prefix as an alternant of {z} plus an alternant
of this same {n}, where it seems to have the meaning 'you'. However, in
/hin;)galira/ 'you (sg.) are cleaning' we are unable to fit the /h/ into the
morphophonemic regularities of {n}, and thus set up a new morpheme {h}
'you'; and in /sdin;)galira/ 'you two are cleaning' we can satisfy the morphophonemic regularities by saying that there are two morphemes: the lsi
alternant of {h} plus the Idl alternant of {n}.
In this way we can divide each prefix into a unique combination of morphophonemic alternants of the following morphemes: {z} 'I', {h} 'you (sg.)',
{a} 'third person sg.', {i} 'plural' (always including 'you', at least due to
absence of {o}), {o} roughly 'person(s) excluding you', {n} roughly 'another
person, you as first choice'. These morphemes were obtained as solutions to
the environmental regularities of the prefixed phonemes. The translations
offered above are an attempt to assign a single meaning to each on the basis
of the meanings of all those words in which it occurs. If we write the prefixes

DISTRIBUTIONAL STRUCTURE

11

morphophonemically, then the meanings of some of the occurring combinations are: {ozn} (phonemically /osd/ etc.) 'I and he', {oz} 'I and they',
{zn} 'I and you (sg.)' {iz} 'I, you, and they', {h} 'you (sg.)', {hn} 'you two',
{in} 'you (pl.)'. From this we can try to extract (as above) a single meaning
contribution which {n} or {oJ or {i} bring to each combination in which
they are included. But it was not the isolation of these complicated central
meanings (if that is always non-trivially possible) that led us to recognize {n}
etc. as morphemes. We do not even know that these central meanings exist
for the speakers: the speakers may be subjectively using two homonymous
{n} morphemes, or they may be using these prefix combinations as fixed
whole entities with only a vague impression of the phonemic and morphophonemic regularities.17
So far, we have not touched the great majority of verb forms, those which
have objects together with the subjects. By using the morphophonemic
relations established previously, we are able to extract the morphemes above
from some of these new combinations, and small extensions of the morphophonemics reveal these morphemes in yet other combinations. Then we
analyze the prefix in /gaiha/ 'I am killing you' as {z}+ {n}, and in /sgwusadohda/ 'you covered me' as {h} + {z}; and certain order statements about
the two prefix components indicate the subject-object relation. The remaining
phonemes of some of these prefixes can be grouped by rather simple morphophonemics into a few additional morphemes like {g} 'animate object'; and
so we finally obtain a morphemic analysis of all the prefixes. This analysis
does not necessarily correlate with any meaning units we may have in mind
about person and number. For example, it gives the same morphemes {znn}
for the prefix in /sdagadhenoha/ 'I and another are searching for you
(whether sg. or dual but not plural)' and in /sdagadhenohagi/ 'I searched for
you two'. Even if we find different phonemes with different meanings, e.g.
/iza-gow'dihaj 'I and he see you (pl.)' and /izay-olighij 'I and they know you
(sg.)' the analysis may say that these are alternants of the same morphemic
composition {izn}; in that case both meanings can be obtained for each form.
The methods indicated so sketchily above suggest how the morphemic
composition of a word or utterance can be determined by the occurrence of
each phoneme sequence relative to others: e.g. per, con relative to sist, tain; or
/z/ /gi/, /0/, etc. rela~ive to various features of environment which are common
to /z/ and /gi/ as against /0/. The final decision as to morphemic analysis
always depends on this relative occurrence of phoneme sequences, since the
grammar then proceeds to state compactly the relative occurrence of the
morphemes. That is, we set up as morphemes those phonemic sequences (or
features) such that all utterances are compactly statable relative occurrences
of them.

12

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

The chief difficulty with this is that it provides us only with a criterion that
tells us whether a given phoneme sequence is a morpheme or not; more
exactly, whether a particular segmentation of an utterance (once we propose
it) divides it into morphemic segments. It does not provide us with a procedure which will directly yield a morphemic segmentation of an utterance.
There is available, however, a procedure which yields most if not all of the
morphemic segmentations of an utterance. In outline it is as follows: Given
any test utterance, associate many utterances whose first phoneme is the
same as that of the test utterance; and note how many different phonemes
follow the first in these utterances. Then consider utterances whose first two
phonemes are the same as the first two of the test utterance, and note how
many different phonemes follow the first two in these. And so on. If after the
first n phonemes the number of different phonemes which follow the nth (in
the associated utterances) is greater than the number after the first n-l
phonemes or the first n+ 1, then we place a tentative morpheme boundary
after the nth. Various operations are needed to correct and check the correctness of each result; but together with the final test of patterned relative
occurrence, this yields the morphemes of a language without any reference to
meaning or informant response.
2.3. Meaning as a Function of Distribution

Distribution suffices to determine the phonemes and morphemes, and to
state a grammar in terms of them. However, both (a) in determining the
elements and (b) in stating the relations between them, it turns out that the
distributional structure does not give ideal coverage. It must either leave
many details unsaid, or else become extremely complicated. For example: (a)
Morphemes are determined on the basis of a patterned independence
(replaceability in utterances) in respect to other morphemes (or phoneme
sequences); but not all morphemes have the same degree of independence:
compare hood (boyhood) with ness (bigness). (b) The grammatical statements
group morphemes into classes, and then say that certain sequences of these
classes occur; but not every member of the one class occurs (in any actual
body of data) with every member of the other: not every adjective occurs with
every noun. Finally we may mention one other respect in which distribution
fails to cover all the facts about speech occurrence: (c) We can state distributional regularities only within narrow domains - for phonology usually the
immediately neighboring phonemes, for morphology usually the sentence or
some part of the sentence.
At all these points where simple distributional regularities are no longer discoverable, people often revert to the position of our man in the street (§1.1)
and say that here the only determinant is meaning: (a) hood has a meaning

DISTRIBUTIONAL STRUCTURE

13

which ties it to certain few nouns; (b) with a given noun, e.g. doctor, there
will be used those adjectives that make sense with it; (c) beyond the sentence
there are no significant formal restrictions on what one says, and sentences
are strung along purely according to meaning. Now meaning is of course a
determinant in these and in other choices that we make when we speak. But
as we make these choices we build a stock of utterances each of which is a
particular combination of particular elements. And this stock of combinations of elements becomes a factor in the way later choices are made (in
the sense indicated in the last two paragraphs of §1.2); for language is not
merely a bag of words but a tool with particular properties which have been
fashioned in the course of its use. The linguist's work is precisely to discover
these properties, whether for descriptive analysis or for the synthesis of
quasi-linguistic systems. As Leonard Bloomfield pointed out, it frequently
happens that when we do not rest with the explanation that something is
due to meaning, we discover that it has a formal regularity or 'explanation'.
It may still be 'due to meaning' in one sense, but it accords with a distributional regularity.
If we investigate in this light the areas where there are no simple distributional regularities, we will often find interesting distributional relations,
relations which tell us something about the occurrence of elements and
which correlate with some aspect of meaning. In certain important cases it
will even prove possible to state certain aspects of meaning as functions of
measurable distributional relations.
(a) There are different degrees of independence (§3.3). We find complete
dependence in the various phonemes of one morpheme, or in the various
parts of a discontinuous morpheme (including grammatical agreement). In
hood we have sufficient independence to make it a separate morpheme, but
it is limited to very few predecessors. In ness there is more independence. The
degree of independence of a morpheme is a distributional measure of the
number of different morphemes with which it occurs, and of the degree to
which they are spread out over various classes or subclasses. The various
members of a distributional class or subclass have some element of meaning
in common, which is stronger the more distributional characteristics the
class has. The major classes have the kind of common meanings that are
associated, say, with the words 'noun' or 'adjective'.
(b) The fact that, for example, not every adjective occurs with every noun
can be used as a measure of meaning difference. For it is not merely that
different members of the one class have different selections of members of the
other class with which they are actually found. More than that: if we consider
words or morphemes A and B to be more different in meaning than A and C,
then we will often find that the distributions of A and B are more different

14

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

than the distributions of A and C. In other words, difference of meaning
correlates with difference of distribution.
If we consider oculist and eye-doctor 18 we find that, as our corpus of
actually occurring utterances grows, these two occur in almost the same
environments, except for such sentences as An oculist is just an eye-doctor
under afancier name, or I told him Burns was an oculist, but since he didn't
know the professional titles, he didn't realize that he could go to him to have his
eyes examined. Ifwe ask informants for any words that may occupy the same
place as oculist in sentences like the above (i.e. have these same environments), we will not in general obtain eye-doctor; but in almost any other
sentence we would. In contrast, there are many sentence environments in
which oculist occurs but lawyer does not: e.g. I've had my eyes examined by
the same oculist for twenty years, or Oculists often have their prescription
blanks printed/or them by opticians. It is not a question of whether the above
sentence with lawyer substituted is true or not; it might be true in some
situation. It is rather a question of the relative frequency of such environments with oculist and with lawyer, or of whether we will obtain lawyer here
if we ask an informant to substitute any words he wishes for oculist (not
asking what words have the same meaning). These and similar tests all
measure the probability of particular environments occurring with particular
elements, i.e. they measure the selections of each element.
It is impossible to obtain more than a rough approximation of the relatively
common selection of a given word (with almost no indication of its rarer
selection). But it is possible to measure how similar are the selection approximations of any two words (within various sets of data). If for two elements
A and B we obtain almost the same list of particular environments (selection),
except that the environment of A always contains some X which never
occurs in the environment of B, we say that A and B are (complementary)
alternants of each other: e.g. knife and knive-. If A and B have identical
environments throughout (in terms of our data tests) we say that they are free
variants: e.g. perhaps for /ek~namiks/ and /iyk~namiks/ economics. If the
environments of A are always different in some regular way from the
environments of B, we state some relation between A and B depending on
this regular type of difference: e.g. ain't and am not have frequent differences
of a certain type in their environments (ain't goin' but am not going) which
we would call dialectal. If A and B have almost identical environments
except chiefly for sentences which contain both, we say they are synonyms:
oculist and eye-doctor. If A and B have some environments in common and
some not (e.g. oculist and lawyer) we say that they have different meanings,
the amount of meaning difference corresponding roughly to the amount of
difference in their environments. (This latter amount would depend on the

DISTRIBUTIONAL STRUCTURE

15

numerical relation of different to same environments, with more weighting
being given to differences of selectional subclasses.) If A and B never have
the same environment, we say that they are members of two different
grammatical classes (this aside from homonymity and from any stated
position where both these classes can occur).
While much more has to be said in order to establish constructional
methods for such a classification as above, these remarks may suffice to
show how it is possible to use the detailed distributional facts about each
morpheme. Though we cannot list all the co-occurrents (selection) of a
particular morpheme, or define its meaning fully on the basis of these, we
can measure roughly the difference in selection between elements, say something about their difference in meaning, and also (above and §4.I) derive
certain structural information.
(c) If we investigate the relative occurrence of any part of one sentence in
respect to any part of the neighboring sentences in the same discourse, we
will find that there are certain regularities (§3.5 end). The sequence of
sentences is not entirely arbitrary; there are even certain elements (e.g.
pronouns) whose occurrence (and meaning) is specifically related to the
grammatically restricted occurrence of certain other morphemes in the
neighboring sentences (§4.1, first paragraph). Such regularities (and meanings) will not extend from one discourse to another (except to another
related in some relevant way to the first, e.g. successive lectures of a series).
A consecutive (or seriate) discourse of one or more persons is thus the fullest
environmental unit for distributional investigation. 19

3. DISTRIBUTIONAL ANALYSIS
We now review briefly the basic analysis applicable to distributional facts.

3.1. Element
The first distributional fact is that it is possible to divide (to segment) any
flow of speech into parts, in such a way that we can find some regularities in
the occurrence of one part relative to others in the flow of speech. These parts
are the discrete elements which have a certain distribution (set of relative
locations) in the flow of speech; and each bit of speech is a particular combination of elements. The first operation is purely segmenting, arbitrary if
need be. The first step of segmenting has to be independent of any particular
distributional criterion, since we cannot speak of distributional relations
until we have not only segments but also a similarity grouping of them (§3.2).
After the first segmenting of utterances, each segment is unique and has a
unique environment (completely different from every other one); after the

16

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

segments have been compared, and 'similar' ones grouped together, we find
that various of these similarity groupings have partially similar and partially
different environments. Hence we can speak about the distributional
relations of these similarity groupings.
If we wish to be able, in the later operations (§3.3-4), to obtain elements
(or classes of elements) whose distributions will have maximum regularity,
we have to divide not only the time flow into successive portions, but also
any single time segment (or succession of time segments) into simultaneous
components (of one segment length, e.g. a tone, or longer, e.g. a pitch-stress
contour). After we have set up the phonetically more obvious segmentations
and simultaneities, and have studied their distribution, we may find that
more regular distributions can be obtained if we change our original segmentation of elements, even to ones that are phonetically less obvious, and
even if some of our adjusted elements become components which extend
over various numbers of other elements.

3.2. Similarity
Another essential distributional fact is that some elements are similar to
others in terms of certain tests; or are similar in the sense that if we group
these similar elements into sets ('similarity groupings'), the distribution of all
members of a set (in respect to other sets) will be the same as far as we can
discover. This reduces ultimately to the similarity of sound segments under
repetition, or in the pair test: Xl is similar to X2 but not to Yl if, when one
native speaker repeats XlZ, X2Z, YIZ, .'" a second speaker can guess correctly
whether XIZ as against YlZ is being said, but not whether XlZ as against X 2Z is
being said. We call Xl and X2 free variants of each other (or members of a
similarity grouping). Note that the pair test involves discrimination of sound
but not of meaning.

3.3. Dependence (Serial)
To obtain a least set of elements sufficient for description we join any
elements which are completely dependent: if A is a set of similar elements (a
similarity grouping) and so is B, and (in a particular type of environment)
only AB occurs (not necessarily contiguously), never A or B alone, then we
set up AB as a single element (a single set of similar elements).
Thereafter we don't have any two elements which are completely dependent upon each other in occurrence. But our elements have various degrees
of dependence: for each element we can say that any utterance (or shorter
domain) which contains it will also contain such and such other classes. For
example, morpheme A may occur always close to (i.e. within a statable
distance from) anyone of a few or many Bl • B2 , .. , If the sequence BIA

DISTRIBUTIONAL STRUCTURE

17

occurs in environments X, it may be that Bl by itself also occurs in X (e.g.
kingdom and king), or that Bl does not (e.g. kingly and king). The Bl with
which A occurs may all have the same types of environment when they occur
without A (e.g. all predecessors of dom are nouns), or some may have one
type and some another (e.g. ish occurs with both nouns and adjectives).
These are a few of the various degrees and types of occurrence-dependence
which an element can have to the elements that occur in the same utterances
as it does.

3.4. Substitutability (Parallel)
It will in general appear that various elements have identical types of
occurrence-dependence. We group A and B into a substitution set whenever
A and B each have the same (or partially same) environments X (X being at
first elements, later substitution sets of elements) within a statable domain of
the flow of speech. This enables us to speak of the occurrence-dependence of
a whole set of elements in respect to other such sets of elements. Some of the
types of partial sameness of environment were listed in §2.3(b).
The elements of distributional structure are usually obtained by the
operations of §3.1, §3.2 and the first paragraph of §3.3. The distributional
relations are usually combinations of §3.3 and §3.4. For example, hood
occurs after few morphemes Nt> N 2 , ••• ofa certain substitution set ('nouns'),
ish after many of them, s and its alternants after all or almost all of them.
Ni + hood or Ni +s occur in the same large environments in which Ni occur
alone. But Ni + ish occur in different environments than Ni alone; however
ish also occurs after many members of another substitution set, At> A z , ...
('adjectives'), and both Ni + ish and Ai + ish occur in the larger environments
of Ai alone.

3.5. Domains
All the statements about dependence and substitutability apply within some
specified domain, the domain being determined either by nature (e.g. silence
before and after an utterance) or by the types of environment within which
there is regularity (e.g. the narrow restriction of hood is only to what precedes
it, and only to the first morpheme in that direction). It is often possible to
state the co-occurrences of elements within a domain in such a way that that
domain then becomes the element whose co-occurrences are regular within a
larger domain: e.g. the occurrences of stems and suffixes within word-length,
and of words within phrases. Common types of domain are the word, phrase,
clause. In many cases the stretches of speech covered by certain long pitch and
stress components (or fixed sequences of short pitch and stress components)
are identical with the domains of distributional relations: word, sentence.

18

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

Although grammar has generally stopped with the sentence, it is possible
to find distributional regularities in larger domains. There are certain sentence
sequences in which the second can be described as a fixed modification of the
first (e.g., with certain restrictions, in the case of questions and answers in
English). There are certain types of distributional relation (e.g. between
English active and passive, between buy and sell) which have particular
kinds of regularity in (not necessarily immediately) neighboring sentences.
For example, if one sentence contains noun A + active (transitive) verb
B+noun C, and a neighboring sentence contains C+verb+A, there is a
certain likelihood that the verb will be the passive of B; or if the neighboring
sentence contains C+the passive of B+some noun, there is a certain likelihood that the second noun will be A or some noun which elsewhere in that
discourse has similar individual environments (selection) to those of A. And
if one sentence contains A buys B from C, and a neighboring sentence
contains C sells B to + some noun, there is a good likelihood that the noun
will be A or an environmentally similar noun (and given C+some verb+B
to A, we may expect the verb to be sell or some environmentally similar
one).20
Finally, if we take a whole connected discourse as environment, we find
that there are certain substitution sets of morphemes which occur regularly
(relative to the other sets) throughout the discourse or some portion of it 21;
these are not the major substitution sets of the language (e.g. nouns) or its
grammatical subclasses, but new groupings which are often relevant only to
that one discourse. And there are certain sequences of these sets which
constitute the subdomains of the discourse, i.e. such that the sets are regular
within these intervals and the intervals are regular within the discourse; these
intervals are not necessarily sentences or clauses in the sense of grammatical
structure. The regularities in a discourse are far weaker and less interrelated
than those within a sentence; but they show that occurrence-dependence
(and the environment relevant for distribution) can extend throughout a
whole discourse.

3.6. Data
The distributional investigations sketched above are carried out by recording
utterances (as stretches of changing sound) and comparing them for partial
similarities. We do not ask a speaker whether his language contains certain
elements or whether they have certain dependences or substitutabilities.
Even though his 'speaking habits' (§1.2) yield regular utterances, they are not
sufficiently close to all the distributional details, nor is the speaker sufficiently
aware of them. Hence we cannot directly investigate the rules of 'the language' via some system of habits or some neurological machine that generates

DISTRIBUTIONAL STRUCTURE

19

all the utterances of the language. We have to investigate some actual corpus
of utterances, and derive therefrom such regularities as ','.'Quld have generated
these utterances - and would presumably generate other utterances of the
language than the ones in our corpus. Statements about distribution are
always made on the basis of a corpus of occurring utterances; one hopes that
these statements will also apply to other utterances which may occur naturally. Thus when we say that the selectional difference in oculist/lawyer is
greater than in oculist/eye-doctor (§2.3), or that the selection of nouns around
the passive verb is the same as the selection around the active verb but with
inverted order (§4.1), we mean that these relations will be approximated in
any sufficiently large corpus (especially one built with the aid of eliciting),
and that they will presumably apply to any sufficiently large additions to the
corpus.
In much linguistic work we require for comparison various utterances
which occur so infrequently that searching for them in an arbitrary corpus is
prohibitively laborious. To get around this, we can use various techniques of
eliciting, i.e. techniques which favor the appearance of utterances relevant to
the feature we are investigating (without influencing the speaker in any
manner that might bring out utterances which would not have sometimes
occurred naturally). In particular, investigations of the selections of particular
morphemes (§2.3, 4.1) can hardly be carried out without the aid of eliciting.
Eliciting is a method of testing whether a certain utterance (which is relevant
to our investigation) would occur naturally: in effect, we try to provide a
speaker with an environment in which he could say that utterance - if he ever
would naturally say it - without extracting it from him if he wouldn't. For
example, if we are testing the active/passive relation we might offer a
speaker noun Al + transitive verb BI and ask him to complete the sentence
in many ways, obtaining a particular selection CI , C z, ... after the verb.
Then we can offer a speaker the passive verb BI + Al and ask him to begin
the sentence in many ways, checking whether we get about the same selection
C b C z, ... before the verb. We can repeat this for various Ai' and then for
various Bi.
4. DISTRIBUTIONAL RELATIONS

The methods of §3 yield first of all a representation of each utterance as a
combination of elements. They also yield a set of statements about the
utterances: what elements and regularities of combination suffice to represent
the utterances. One can go beyond this and study the kinds of regularities,
and the kinds of relations among elements. As was pointed out at the end of
§2.3(b), certain correlations may be discovered even in those distributional
facts which are too individual to be directly useful.

20

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

4.1. As an example of the latter we may consider selectional similarity.

For instance, it is impossible to list all the verbs that follow each particular
noun, or all the verbs that follow who. But it is possible to state the following
relation between the verb selection of nouns and the verb selection of who:
Under an eliciting test as in §3.6, we will get after The pianist - much the
same verbs as we will get after The pianist who -, and so for every noun. This
meam that the verb selection of who is the same as the verb selection of the
noun preceding who. We have here a distributional characteristic that
distinguishes such pronominal elements from ordinary nouns.
Or we may consider the active/passive relation mentioned in §3.6. If we
take a large number of sentences containing a transitive verb in English, e.g.
The kids broke that window last week, we can elicit sentences consisting of the
same verb but with the passive morpheme, the same nouns before and after it
but in reverse order, and the same remainder of the sentence, e.g. That
window was broken by the kids last week. Some of these sentences may be
stylistically clumsy, so that they would not occur unless some special
circumlocution were involved; but they are obtainable by otherwise valid
eliciting techniques. 22 In contrast, if we seek such inversion without the
passive, we will fail to elicit many sentences: we can get The kids saw Mary
last week and Mary saw the kids last week; but to The kids saw the movie we
will never - or hardly ever - get The movie saw the kids (even though this
sentence is grammatical). Or if we seek such selectional similarity (with or
without inversion) for broke/will break or the like, we will find the same
selection as to preceding and following nouns, but not always as to the rest
of the sentence: The kids broke that window and The kids will break that
window, but not The kids will break that window last week or The kids broke
that window if they don't watch out. It thus appears that, using only distributional information about an ordinarily elicited corpus, we can find a
relation between the a.ctive verb and the passive verb which is different from
the relation between -ed and will.
4.2. The distributional regularities can themselves be a subject of study.
One can consider recurrent types of dependence and substitutabilities that
are found in a language (or in many languages), and find on one level such
relations as "subject" and "object" (semantic names for distributional
positions), and on a higher level of generality such relations as 'constituent'
and 'head of a construction' (if A occurs in environment X, and AB does too,
but B does not, then A is the head of AB). One can consider the parts of a
grammar which permit alternative distributional analyses, and check their
relation to language change and dialect or idiolect interrelations (since
probably every linguistic structure has some points which are structurally in

DISTRIBUTIONAL STRUCTURE

21

flux). One can investigate what are the structural characteristics of those
parts of a language which are productive. Furthermore, one can survey what
is similar and what is different in a great many language structures, and how
linguistic systems in general differ from such partially similar systems as
mathematics and logistic 'languages', sign languages, gestures, codes, music.
NOTES
The investigation of historical regularity without direct regard to descriptive (synchronic) structure was the major achievement of the linguists of the late eighteen hundreds.
There are incipient studies of historical-descriptive interrelations, as in H. M. Hoenigswald, 'Sound Change and LinguisticStructure', Lg. 22 (1946),138-43; cf. A. G. Juilland,
'A Bibliography of Diachronic Phonemics', Word 9 (1953), 198-208. The independent
study of descriptive structure was clarified largely by Ferdinand de Saussure's Cours de
linguistique generale, the Prague Circle in its Travaux du Cercle linguistique de Prague,
Edward Sapir in various writings, and Leonard Bloomfield's Language.
2 These approaches are discussed by Martin Joos, 'Description of Language Design',
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 22 (1950), 702-8, and W. F. Twaddell, ibid.
24 (1952), 607-11.
3 For a discussion of simplicity in this connection, see a forthcoming article by Noam
Chomsky, 'Some Comments on Simplicity and the Form of Grammars'.
4 Y. R. Chao, 'The Non-Uniqueness of Phonemic Solutions of Phonetic Systems', Bulletin of the Institute of History and Philology, Academia Sinica 4 (1934), 363-98. a. the two
solutions of Annamese phonemes in M. B. Emeneau, Studies in Vietnamese (Annamese)
Grammar, 9-22.
5 This kind of formulation is best expressed in the work of Sapir and Newman; cf. reviews of Selected Writings ofEdward Sapir (ed. by D. Mandelbaum) in Language 27 (1951),
289-92; and of Stanley Newman, Yokuts Language of California in International Journal
of American Linguistics 10 (1944), 196-211.
6 An opposition has sometimes been claimed between real facts and mathematical manipulation of structure. This claim ignores the fact that science is (among other things) a
process of indicating much data by few general statements, and that mathematical methods are often useful in achieving this. Mathematical and other methods of arranging data
are not a game but essential parts of the activity of science.
7 As pointed out by Kurt Goldstein, Language and Language Disturbances, 71,103.
8 E.g. in Edward Sapir, 'La realite psychologique des phonemes', Journal de Psychologie
Normale et Pathologique 30 (1933), 247-65 (translated in David Mandelbaum, ed., Selected
Writings of Edward Sapir, 46-60).
9 C. F. Hockett, review of Recherches structurales in International Journal of American
Linguistics 18 (1952), 98.
10 As pointed out to the writer by A. W. Holt.
11 This applies to the grammatical innovation involved in new formations; the selection
of morphemes within a class is determined, not only by these "grammatical" associations
but also semantically. Cf. the first paragraph of §1.1 above.
12 Here we have discussed whether the distributional structure exists in the speakers as a
parallel system of habits of speaking and of productivity. This is quite different from the
dubious suggestion made at various times that the categories of language determine the
speakers' categories of perception, a suggestion which may be a bit of occupational imperialism for linguistics, and which is not seriously testable as long as we have so little knowledge about people's categories of perception. Cf. for the suggestion, Benjamin L. Whorf,
'The Relation of Habitual Thought and Behavior to Language', Language, Culture and
Personality (Sapir Memorial Volume) (ed. by A. I. Hallowell, L. Spier, and S. Newman),
1

22

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

75-93; 'Languages and Logic', The Technology Review, 1941,43-6; and against it, Eric
H. Lenneberg, 'Cognition in Ethnolinguistics', Lg. 29 (1953), 463-71; Lewis S. Feuer,
'Sociological Aspects of the Relation Between Language and Philosophy', Philosophy of
Science 20 (1953), 85-100.
13 In E. G. Schachtel's 'On Memory and Childhood Amnesia', Psychiatry 10 (1947), 1-26
it is suggested that the experiences of infancy are not recallable in later life because the
selection of aspects of experience and the classification of experience embodied in language,
which fixes experience for recall, differs from the way events and observations are experienced (and categorized) by the infant.
14 Human Nature in the Light of Psychopathology: The William James Lectures for 193839, ch. 3.
15 The following analysis can be fully understood only if one checks through the actual
lists of Cherokee forms. The few forms cited here are taken from William D. Reyburn,
'Cherokee Verb Morphology II', International Journal of American Linguistics 19 (1953),
259-73. For the analysis, see the charts and comments in Reyburn's work and in Z. S.
Harris, 'Cherokee Skeletal Grammar', and 'Cherokee Grammatical Word Lists and
Utterances', in the Franz Boas Collection of the American Philosophical Society Library.
16 This assumption is based on the fact that each morpheme has a different distribution
(§2.36), so that same feature of environment points to the same morpheme.
17 Since new formations of these combinations do not appear, we cannot apply the productivity tests of §2.1 to discover the speakers' morphemic recognition.
IS This particular pair was suggested to me by Y. Bar-Hillel, who however considers that
distributional correlates of meaning differences cannot be established.
19 It should be clear that only after we discover what kinds of distributional regularities
there are among successive elements or sections in discourses can we attempt any organized
semantic interpretation of the successions discovered. Various types of discourses have
various types of succession (of sentences, clauses, or other intervals). In mathematics
and the constructed 'languages' of logic, certain conditions are imposed on what sentences
can appear in succession in their connected discourses (proofs): each sentence (line in a
proof) has to be a theorem or else derived from a preceding sentence in a particular way.
This situation does not hold for natural languages, where the truth-value of logic is not
kept constant through successive sentences, and where the types of succession are more
varied.
20 Such relations as that of active to passive, or buy to sell, are essentially substitutability relations (§3.4), i.e. they show that certain elements have similar environments (e.g.
partially inverted ones). The fact that they may appear in neighboring sentences is a serial
relation (§3.3) which is a secondary characteristic of certain substitutabilities. Relations
like that of active to passive are different from the essentially serial relations of successive
intervals of a discourse, discussed at the end of §3.5.
21 The fact that a discourse contains several or many occurrences of a given substitution
class, often in parallel positions, brings out a rare relation in linguistics: the order of occurrence of various members of the same class. Something like this comes up in compound
nouns, or in successions of two or more adjectives (sometimes with preferred order). Usually, if two members of a class occur in one domain, their order is not regular (e.g. in most
cases of Nand N); but in compound nouns, for instance, certain members are frequent in
the first N position, and others in the second.
22 There will be a few exceptions where the passive is not obtainable. And if we try to
elicit the active on the basis of the passive, we run into the difficulty of distinguishing between by of the passive (The letter was finished by Carl) and by as preposition (The letter
was finished by noon).

2

MORPHEME ALTERNANTS IN LINGUISTIC ANALYSIS

The purpose of this paper is to suggest a technique for determining the
morphemes of a language, as rigorous as the method used now for finding
its phonemes. The proposed technique differs only in details of arrangement
from the methods used by linguists today. However, these small differences
suffice to simplify the arrangement of grammars.
THE PRESENT TREATMENT OF MORPHEMES

1.0. In essence, the present treatment uses the following criterion: Every
sequence of phonemes which has meaning, and which is not composed of
smaller sequences having meaning, is a morpheme. 1 Different sequences of
phonemes constitute different morphemes; occurrences of the same sequence
with sufficiently different meanings constitute homonyms.
In some cases, this criterion dissociates certain morphemes which we wish,
because of the grammatical structure, to unite. Various methods are used at
present to get around this contradiction. In cases 1-3 below, different sequences of phonemes are considered as different forms of the same morpheme. In cases 4-5, sequences of phonemes are called not morphemes but
processes and the like. In case 6, a special relation is seen between different
morphemes.
1.1. Tiibatulabal 2 puw 'to irrigate', u'buw 'he irrigated' would have to be
analyzed as containing different morphemes, since the phoneme sequence
/puw/ does not occur in the second word. Similarly,pala'la'to arrive', a·bala·la
'he arrived'; for every morpheme which begins with a voiced stop after a
prefix there is a similar morpheme beginning with the homorganic voiceless
stop in word-initial. In spite of the phonemic difference between the members
of each of these pairs, we wish to consider each pair a single morpheme,
since in other cases we have a single morpheme in the position of both
members of these pairs: wa'Pin 'to pour', iJ'wiJ'Pin 'he poured'. We say that
there is a regular alternation in the language: a voiced stop is replaced by
the homorganic voiceless stop in word-initial.
Language 18, No.3 (1942), 169-80.

23

24

STRUCTURAL AND TRANSFORMATIONAL LINGUISTICS

Similarly, Early Hebrew 3 had ro's 'head', ro'so' 'his head', but mawt
'death', mo·t6· 'his death'. Since unstressed /aw/ never occurs before a consonant, we say that it is regularly replaced by /0'/.
1.2. We would also have to say that there are different morphemes in
knife and knives. However, the connection between these is too obvious to
be disregarded in the grammar, and the difference occurs also in several
other pairs: wives, but strifes. We therefore create a morphophonemic
symbol, say /F/, which represents /v/ before /-z/ 'plural' and /f/ elsewhere,
and say that there is but one English morpheme /najF/. Or we give a morphophonemic formula: /f/ is replaced by /v/ before /-z/ 'plural' in the following
morphemes - knife, wife, ....
The use of morphophonemic statements or symbols is however of little
use in the next case, and of no use in case 4-6.
1.3. By the criterion of § 1.0, Heb. 'i'r 'city' and 'a'ri'm 'cities' contain
different morphemes. 4 Since the difference between 'i'r and 'a'r- is not found
between other morphemes with identical meanings, it seems awkward to
state it in a morphophonemic formula: /i/ is replaced by /a/ in 'i'r before
-i·m. Some linguists have called such pairs morpholexical alternants of one
morpheme. 5
1.4. In Greek ~tveo 'I remain', 1.u;~EVllICCL 'I have remained', AUeo 'I loose',
AEAOICCL 'I have loosed', the meaning of the reduplication is the same in all
cases, but the phonemic sequences vary so much that they are not commonly
considered to constitute a single morpheme. Instead, reduplication is often
called a morphological process, a special kind of affix, and the like.
1.5. Much the same is true of vowel changes which correlate with meaning
changes. They cannot be expressed by morphophonemic formulas, since
these formulas state the alternate forms of a single morpheme, whereas take
and took are not the same morpheme, having different meanings. Such vowel
changes are usually described as special kinds of morphological modification,
though they may alternate with additive suffixes like oed 'past time'.
1.6. There remain cases of morphemes which complement each other but
are entirely dissimilar in their phonemic sequences: am, are, is, be, etc. These
are considered different morphemes, but with a special mutual relation of
suppletion.
PROPOSED TREATMENT OF MORPHEMES

